How to Manage an Employee’s Request for an ADA Accommodation

Many employers are required to comply with the ADA and provide reasonable accommodations when an employee with a disability makes a request.

Workforce Management
Last Updated: September 23, 2022 | Read Time: 9 min

If your business employs more than 15 workers (or fewer depending on the state you’re in), it is subject to the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990 (ADA). This civil rights law prohibits discrimination against people with disabilities not only on the job, but also in schools, on transportation, and in every public and private space that is open to the public. The ADA provides equal opportunity in areas such as employment, transportation, and state and local government services, to people with disabilities similar to the protections provided to people on the basis of their sex, age, religion, or race. The Americans with Disabilities Act Amendments Act (ADAAA) greatly expanded the definition of “disability” and became law on January 1, 2009. Disabilities now include conditions previously not covered, such as bipolar disorder, diabetes, epilepsy, major depression, and multiple sclerosis.
Under the ADA, employers are required to provide reasonable accommodations to an employee or job candidate with a disability who asks for them.
According to ADA guidelines, an individual with a disability is someone who:
The person’s impairment must significantly impede one or more major life activities for a disability to be covered by the ADA. These activities are ones that a person without a disability can do with little or no struggle, including:
Reasonable accommodations are changes to a job application, hiring process, or the way a job is performed that enable a person with a disability—who is otherwise qualified for the job—to perform the essential functions of the role and benefit from equal employment. Accommodations are considered “reasonable” if they don’t create an unnecessary burden on the business.
The EEOC and Title I of the ADA require companies to evaluate requests for reasonable accommodation on a case-by-case basis. The first step in the reasonable accommodation process is when an employee discloses that they have a disability; employers are not required to accommodate disabilities they are not made aware of. For example, an employer is not obligated to provide a closer parking space to an employee if they weren’t previously made aware of the need for accommodation.  
The reasonable accommodation process begins when an employee informs their manager or HR of a disability at any time during their employment. An employee does not have to disclose a disability at the time of hire. It’s important to note that the employee also does not have to make the request in writing; a verbal request is all that’s needed to get the process started. However, an employer would be wise to document the request. It’s also important to note that the employee cannot simply say they have a disability without also requesting accommodation. They must state how the disability is preventing them from performing their job duties. Whether it’s verbal or written, a disability disclosure should never be ignored. 
The goal of this discussion is to learn about the barriers the employee is experiencing and why they believe they need accommodation. The employer can share an overview of the accommodation request process to ensure the employee understands next steps. Everyone involved in the conversation must agree to keep shared information confidential when discussing accommodations. This information will never go in an employee’s file and should only be accessible to the employee’s manager and HR. Co-workers whose job duties or workspace may change because of the accommodation can be made aware of the modifications needed, but not the reasons for the change.
If the reason for the accommodation request isn’t obvious (for example, a mental health diagnosis), the employer can request medical certification from the employee’s healthcare provider. The employer cannot request medical documentation if the disability is obvious. As with the accommodation request, this information is to be kept confidential.
If an accommodation request is approved, the employer and employee should make a plan to put it into effect, including any additional training for the employee or modifications for their fellow employees. If the employer plans to deny a request, they should have a prepared reason for the denial.
All parties involved should document actions taken, dates, and adjustments made for the reasonable accommodation to maintain an accurate record in the event of a complaint or other legal action.
Here are five examples of what reasonable accommodations can look like:
Paycor builds HR software for leaders of medium & small business. For 30 years, we’ve been listening to and partnering with leaders, so we know what they need: HCM technology that saves time, powerful analytics, and expert HR compliance advice to help solve problems and achieve goals. Take a self-guided tour of our software and see for yourself.
 Previous:
Next:
Stay up to date with the latest HR trends

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Employee satisfaction surveys are a great way to stay in tune with what your employees are thinking. Get real insights on how to engage and motivate your team.

        Article      
Read Time: 10 min
Employee burnout can impact work quality and morale. Discover the warning signs for burnout and how to prevent it in your workplace.

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Being an effective leader requires more than just technical knowledge. Create an environment where everyone can thrive and understand emotions in oneself and others.
HCM Software
HR + Payroll Software
Talent Management
Workforce Management
Employee Experience
Benefits Administration
Quick Links
Services + Support
855-565-3285
Talk to Sales
855-752-8564
© 2023 Paycor, Inc  |  Refer Paycor  |  Privacy Policy  |  1-800-501-9462 |
*Represents approximately 30,000 corporate clients covering 40,000 businesses employing people