Tracking Applicant Flow Data for OFCCP Compliance

Are you still in the dark about OFCCP applicant flow logs and applicant flow data? Here's everything you need to know.

Talent Management
Last Updated:  March 25, 2020 | Read Time: 3 min
Federal contractors and subcontractors must adhere to a variety of OFCCP regulations. There is a significant amount of information that you must keep track of and be able to report on in the event of an audit. To maintain all of this information, the OFCCP recommends that employers systematically and consistently record “applicant flow data.”
Applicant flow data is essentially all of the information needed by auditors to conduct an adverse impact analysis. This information is captured by employers through the use of an applicant flow log (AFL). An applicant flow log contains information regarding which jobs were open during a period, who applied to these jobs (information to be recorded is listed below) and which candidates were selected as hires. Effective applicant flow logs allow an employer, as well as an auditor, to paint a picture of the hiring process and determine whether it is compliant with OFCCP standards for EEO/AA initiatives.
Below, RPL Management Resources provides an overview of what specific information is required to be tracked and stored per candidate in an AFL by Federal Law.
Applicant flow logs play a valuable role in our employment economy. They help to deter discriminatory hiring practices and ensure that all Americans have equal access to Federally funded jobs. However, maintaining applicant flow logs can be incredibly burdensome for most businesses, especially those small and medium-size businesses that still manage their hiring processes manually. The time spent collecting and recording all of this data can be crippling, especially when resources are scarce.
If you are currently managing your applicant flow log manually (or not at all), then it is time for an upgrade. With the introduction of the right applicant tracking system, you can automate the creation of your applicant flow logs. Through voluntary EEO/AA questionnaires, applicant tracking systems allow you to collect and store all of the information related to Executive Order 11246, VEVRAA and Section 503. Additionally, with minimum qualification questions, reasons for non-selection, and advanced analytics/reporting functionality, a compliant applicant tracking system empowers you to justify the legality of your hiring processes.
Remember, employers should always consult with an affirmative action expert or labor attorney throughout every step of the government contracting process.

 Previous:
Next:
Stay up to date with the latest HR trends

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Employee satisfaction surveys are a great way to stay in tune with what your employees are thinking. Get real insights on how to engage and motivate your team.

        Article      
Read Time: 10 min
Employee burnout can impact work quality and morale. Discover the warning signs for burnout and how to prevent it in your workplace.

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Being an effective leader requires more than just technical knowledge. Create an environment where everyone can thrive and understand emotions in oneself and others.
HCM Software
HR + Payroll Software
Talent Management
Workforce Management
Employee Experience
Benefits Administration
Quick Links
Services + Support
855-565-3285
Talk to Sales
855-752-8564
© 2023 Paycor, Inc  |  Refer Paycor  |  Privacy Policy  |  1-800-501-9462 |
*Represents approximately 30,000 corporate clients covering 40,000 businesses employing people