Why Automating Expense Reporting Can Save Your Business Time

An automated expense reporting solution provides you with more insight into the costs your business incurs and creates a more efficient process.

Workforce Management
Last Updated: May 16, 2022 | Read Time: 6 min
According to a study conducted by Wakefield Research, 69% of businesses use spreadsheets and 49% use handwritten records to track spend. Please, don’t do that. Manage reimbursable employee expenses in an automated system. It’s easier on the administrator and a much better experience for employees.
Automated expense reporting is the online process of collecting, submitting, and approving business expense reports, versus doing the process manually on paper or in spreadsheets. These expenses typically include costs related to travel (e.g., airfare, lodging, vehicle rental), daily meal allowances, business entertainment (e.g., happy hour or dinner with clients), etc.
The most common and frequently used method of keeping track of employee expenses is through a physical corporate credit card. Employees who entertain clients or travel to worksites can be issued a card, with the billing sent to the finance or accounting team. All the major players in the card space automatically categorize expenses making it easy for the accounting team to keep track of who’s spending what where.
Before the pandemic, business travel expenses were on the rise. Today, the situation has flip-flopped and become something of a hybrid, with costs related to working from home outpacing work travel. The biggest challenges with expense reporting, however, remain more or less unchanged.
Unclear travel policies—Vague business travel policies make it much more likely that employees will unintentionally overspend, misfile, etc.
The finance black hole—Expenses that are submitted by employees far too often turn into a guessing game for the finance department. Without an effective system, it can be difficult to gather insight into how much still needs to be paid at the end of each month and determine exactly where the company’s money ultimately goes.
Not enough insight—Credit cards don’t provide the opportunity for an employee to indicate, for example, who attended that $2,500 client dinner at the best restaurant in town; you still need paper or a spreadsheet to keep track. An added downside is that some employees might take advantage of having a company credit card and use it for personal expenses.
The primary benefits of using automated expense reporting are basically a mirror image of the previous paragraph. By implementing an automated expense reporting solution, you gain more insight into the costs your business incurs, you make the entire reporting process more efficient, and you can better implement your own business travel and expense rules.
While having an online tracking of expenses and a cloud-based location to store scanned receipts are great features, they’re the basics that every expense management software should provide. Additional functionality will offer greater efficiency for employees and finance. Look for:
When building a travel and expense policy, you should include a few sections to help ensure employees understand company expectations.  
Travel expenses include any type of transportation or lodging expense that employees incur while on a trip for company business. Some amounts, including employee meals, should have limits set. Expenses in this category include airfare; train, bus, and rideshare fares; rental vehicles; tolls and parking fees; hotel accommodations; mileage for personal vehicle use; required medical expenses (vaccinations for overseas travel); passport and visa fees.
Expenses made by a non-employee traveling with an employee (e.g., a significant other or family member) should be clearly marked as exempt from reimbursement. Upgrading a flight reservation to business or first-class and any personal activities such as sightseeing are billed at the employee’s expense. Fines such as a speeding ticket are also not covered expenses.  
When companies automate the expense management process, they can save considerable time, make expense reporting more precise, and greatly decrease the time it takes to repay employees for their business expenses. Bottom line: The expense reporting process doesn’t have to be cumbersome, especially if you use expense report automation.
Paycor’s unified expense management software makes it easy for employees to enter eligible expenses, for frontline managers to approve them, and for payroll administrators to submit reimbursement. But if you’re still on the fence about automated expense reporting, this expense management template can help.
 Previous:
Next:
Stay up to date with the latest HR trends

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Employee satisfaction surveys are a great way to stay in tune with what your employees are thinking. Get real insights on how to engage and motivate your team.

        Article      
Read Time: 10 min
Employee burnout can impact work quality and morale. Discover the warning signs for burnout and how to prevent it in your workplace.

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Being an effective leader requires more than just technical knowledge. Create an environment where everyone can thrive and understand emotions in oneself and others.
HCM Software
HR + Payroll Software
Talent Management
Workforce Management
Employee Experience
Benefits Administration
Quick Links
Services + Support
855-565-3285
Talk to Sales
855-752-8564
© 2023 Paycor, Inc  |  Refer Paycor  |  Privacy Policy  |  1-800-501-9462 |
*Represents approximately 30,000 corporate clients covering 40,000 businesses employing people