Military Leave Laws By State And USERRA

Employment laws are in place for Americans in the military. Find up to date military leave laws for your state here.

Workforce Management
Last Updated:  March 5, 2020 | Read Time: 12 min
The U.S. military Reserve and National Guard are more than 1 million members strong. With so many Americans volunteering for Reserve forces, many employers are asking themselves: “What do I do when one of my employees is called up for training or active duty?”
While the Uniformed Services Employment and Reemployment Rights Act (USERRA) is the federal law created to protect military leave, many states have built on top of this foundation to establish additional regulations that impact employers. Here’s breakdown of state and federal-level military leave laws business and HR leaders need to know.
At its core, USERRA requires employers to guarantee unpaid leave for five years (additional time may be required if the employee’s service falls under an exception), along with continued access to health benefits (up to two years) to all employees on voluntary or involuntary federal active duty, as well as unpaid time off for training and funeral honors duty.
To qualify for USERRA and be reinstated to the workplace, employees must meet these requirements:
When they return, employees are protected by the “escalator principle”—their pay, benefits, vacation time and seniority continue to accrue as it would if they had not been absent. *That means employers may be required to offer returning employees seniority-based promotions. *Returning employees are protected for one year and cannot be fired without good cause.
Download and print this poster for a deeper dive into employee responsibilities.
Employers should also be aware of the Family and Medical Leave Act (FMLA), which guarantees 26 weeks of leave for employees or caregivers of those on or injured during active duty.
When the State National Guard is called up by the president, USERRA applies. But when a governor calls up members of the State National Guard—like in the case of a natural disaster or civil unrest, or to fulfil training requirements (typically one weekend per month and two weeks per year)—employers must consult state-level laws.
States typically allow unpaid leave with full reinstatement rights, while paid leave is often guaranteed for state employees.
10 days unpaid leave for emergency civil air patrol operational missions (companies with 16+ employees).
15 days unpaid leave for civil air patrol (Companies with 15+ employees).
15 days (companies with 15 to 50 employees) or 30 days (companies with 51+ employees) unpaid leave for civil air patrol.
15 days unpaid leave for emergency civil air patrol missions (companies with 15+ employees).
15 days unpaid leave for emergency civil air patrol service operations (companies with 11+ employees).
Are you at risk for penalties? Discover if your HR process is as complaint as you think.
Paycor’s free HR Compliance Audit helps determine the effectiveness of your organization’s HR function. This easy assessment is a systematic, objective tool that evaluates your regulatory and policy compliance. Even better, the audit only takes about 2 minutes to complete! What are you waiting for?
 Previous:
Next:
Stay up to date with the latest HR trends

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Employee satisfaction surveys are a great way to stay in tune with what your employees are thinking. Get real insights on how to engage and motivate your team.

        Article      
Read Time: 10 min
Employee burnout can impact work quality and morale. Discover the warning signs for burnout and how to prevent it in your workplace.

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Being an effective leader requires more than just technical knowledge. Create an environment where everyone can thrive and understand emotions in oneself and others.
HCM Software
HR + Payroll Software
Talent Management
Workforce Management
Employee Experience
Benefits Administration
Quick Links
Services + Support
855-565-3285
Talk to Sales
855-752-8564
© 2023 Paycor, Inc  |  Refer Paycor  |  Privacy Policy  |  1-800-501-9462 |
*Represents approximately 30,000 corporate clients covering 40,000 businesses employing people