Urgent: PPP Round 2 Can Be Used for Cloud Software Upgrades

Updates to the PPP, also known as PPP-2, now allow for software and cloud upgrades. See how this may impact your business.

Workforce Management
Last Updated:  February 2, 2021 | Read Time: 3 min
By now you’ve heard that the second round of relief from the Paycheck Protection Program (PPP) is underway. New funds totaling more than $284 billion have been assigned to the Paycheck Protection Program, as part of the $900 billion COVID-19 relief package passed in December 2020.
You may not have heard that updates to the Paycheck Protection Program (PPP), also called PPP-2, can now be used for software and cloud upgrades. How did this happen? Congress extended the definition of operational expenses to apply to:
“any business software or cloud computing service that facilitates business operations, product or service delivery, the processing, payment, or tracking of payroll expenses, human resources, sales and billing functions, or accounting or tracking of supplies, inventory, records and expenses.”
This means that non-payroll expenses covered by PPP-2 may now include IT expenses for business continuity. This encompasses everything from accounting software to HR software and monthly subscriptions for cloud software.
Non-payroll expenses, including the new cloud and software allowances, can only make up 40% of the loan amount spent. The rest must be spent on employee payroll.
This is a significant adjustment from the first round of PPP and great news for business leaders who have been planning to make the shift to the cloud but have been stifled by more pressing safety concerns. Investing in cloud software for accounting, HR and payroll is a clear path to leaner, more efficient operations, but the shift has been more difficult for businesses to make because of budget cuts.
PPP-2 is focused on businesses who haven’t yet received any PPP funding, particularly those owned by women and minorities, as well as nonprofits and cultural venues.
Qualifying circumstances remain unchanged for first-time applicants. Businesses who have already received funds from the program will only be eligible for a second loan if they have 300 employees or less and can prove significant losses. A 25% reduction in gross revenue for any quarter of 2020 qualifies as a significant loss.
Other potentially forgivable costs in addition to cloud computing software include essential expenditures to suppliers, costs for worker protection and facility modifications necessary to comply with COVID-19 safety guidelines.
Eligible borrowers have until March 31, 2021 to apply for new PPP loans. If approved for a PPP loan, a borrower is eligible for 100% loan forgiveness if they meet certain criteria established under the CARES Act (Mar. 27, 2020) and existing SBA rules.
Paycor assists our clients by providing specially configured payroll reports which they can use to complete their PPP loan applications. Paycor reports can be prepared for PPP-2 Loan Applicants or existing borrowers for PPP Loan Forgiveness.
Read more on the PPP program and how we can help.
 Previous:
Next:
Stay up to date with the latest HR trends

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Employee satisfaction surveys are a great way to stay in tune with what your employees are thinking. Get real insights on how to engage and motivate your team.

        Article      
Read Time: 10 min
Employee burnout can impact work quality and morale. Discover the warning signs for burnout and how to prevent it in your workplace.

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Being an effective leader requires more than just technical knowledge. Create an environment where everyone can thrive and understand emotions in oneself and others.
HCM Software
HR + Payroll Software
Talent Management
Workforce Management
Employee Experience
Benefits Administration
Quick Links
Services + Support
855-565-3285
Talk to Sales
855-752-8564
© 2023 Paycor, Inc  |  Refer Paycor  |  Privacy Policy  |  1-800-501-9462 |
*Represents approximately 30,000 corporate clients covering 40,000 businesses employing people