Restaurant Revitalization Fund Relief - Act Now

There's good news for restauranteurs who struggled during the pandemic. The Restaurant Revitalization Fund (RRF) passed in the US. Learn if you're eligible.

Workforce Management
Last Updated: June 2, 2021 | Read Time: 5 min
In the past year, more than 110,000 restaurants closed long-term or permanently as a result of the pandemic (Bloomberg). But, there’s good news for restaurant owners who have held on this long (food trucks, bars, caterers and stands, too). More than $26B in funding is available through the Restaurant Revitalization Fund as a part of the American Rescue Plan Act (passed on March 11, 2021). The RRF provides funding for pandemic-related revenue loss. As long as the funds are used by March 11, 2023, recipients are not required to repay the funding.
All businesses serving food and drink are eligible for the RRF. This includes:
• Food stands, food trucks, food carts• Caterers• Bars, saloons, lounges, taverns• Licensed facilities or premises of a beverage alcohol producer where the public may taste, sample or purchase products• Other similar places of business in which the public or patrons assemble for the primary purpose of being served food or drink• Snack and nonalcoholic beverage bars• Bakeries• Brewpubs, tasting rooms, taprooms• Breweries and/or microbreweries• Wineries and distilleries• Inns
For a complete list of eligible entities, see the RRF guide, here. Some conditions apply. Restaurant owners can request up to $10 million but no more than $5 million per physical location. Amounts under $1,000 will not be considered. In addition, businesses must have fewer than 20 locations to be eligible. The RRF does not exempt owners who have already applied for and/or received PPP loans.
The purpose of this funding is to provide support to eligible businesses that suffered revenue losses related to the COVID-19 pandemic. The fund is administered by the Small Business Administration (SBA). The money can be used on operating expenses, including rent, payroll, food and beverage supplies and debt service.  Note: Past-due expenses are eligible if they were incurred after February 15, 2020 through March 11, 2023.
For the first 21 days of the application window, the SBA will prioritize applications from small businesses owned by women and veterans, as well as socially and economically disadvantaged individuals. Applications received after the first 21 days will be funded on a first-come, first-served basis.
In order to apply, business owners should be prepared with documentation of operating expenses, 2019 tax returns and 2020 tax returns. A sample application is available at SBA.gov and the organization is also providing application assistance for eligible businesses.
There are three ways to apply for the Restaurant Revitalization fund.
Applicants should allow up to 14 days for processing, review, approval and fund distribution. At the time of this article, approximately $2B had been granted with an average request of $125,000.
Paycor is here to help restaurant owners recovering from pandemic-related revenue loss. Learn more about how our products help with turnover, payroll, monitoring overtime and more in our product demo.
 Previous:
Next:
Stay up to date with the latest HR trends

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Employee satisfaction surveys are a great way to stay in tune with what your employees are thinking. Get real insights on how to engage and motivate your team.

        Article      
Read Time: 10 min
Employee burnout can impact work quality and morale. Discover the warning signs for burnout and how to prevent it in your workplace.

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Being an effective leader requires more than just technical knowledge. Create an environment where everyone can thrive and understand emotions in oneself and others.
HCM Software
HR + Payroll Software
Talent Management
Workforce Management
Employee Experience
Benefits Administration
Quick Links
Services + Support
855-565-3285
Talk to Sales
855-752-8564
© 2023 Paycor, Inc  |  Refer Paycor  |  Privacy Policy  |  1-800-501-9462 |
*Represents approximately 30,000 corporate clients covering 40,000 businesses employing people