Best Talent Development Strategies to Explore in 2021

With talent development strategies in place, organizations can expect to thrive and retain employees at a higher rate. See how your organization can benefit.

Talent Management
Last Updated: June 24, 2021 | Read Time: 7 min
Did you know there is a major difference between talent development and performance management? If your leaders are only trained to manage employee performance after the fact, they may be robbing your team of opportunities to improve.
Performance management is everything a company does to track and improve how effectively an employee does their job. It usually involves giving feedback on performance at an annual review. A talent development program, on the other hand, is designed to help employees build knowledge, abilities and a skillset to achieve their potential.
When done right, talent development retains high performers resulting in a highly successful, sustainable organization that consistently meets its strategic goals and objectives.
And, employees prefer it. While 62% of employees feel blindsided by reviews, 94% of employees say they’d stay with a company longer if that company is invested in helping them learn (CNBC). But, talent development doesn’t happen by accident.
Instituting a talent development program is much different than instituting a performance management program. Instead of checking boxes or completing forms, leaders are required to ask more questions, connect employees’ personal career goals with company objectives and help design a path for success.
Fortunately, there are talent development best practices you can incorporate immediately.
Executive coaching is the method of connecting experienced coaches with employees or leadership candidates to help them maximize their potential. It’s one of the fastest ways to achieve talent development goals because of its focus on accountability. In an ideal coaching scenario, an employee is empowered to act while being supported, instead of being chastised for ‘getting it wrong.’ If you are considering adding executive coaching to your arsenal:
High-performing companies often have a culture of continuous development, where managers give employees regular, future-focused feedback tied to measurable goals. Continuous feedback also increases trust, collaboration and innovation. Talent development programs are most successful when employees and supervisors work together to align on goals and drive better performance.
Here are some methods to transform your organization from once-a-year conversations to a culture of continuous feedback.
Objectives and key results (OKRs) is a goal-setting methodology in which an employee’s personal outcomes are matched with the organization’s objectives. Performance is tracked with ambitious, but measurable, goals. OKRs encourage accountability in every step of achieving success by using outcomes instead of tasks as a driver. This method also helps engage employees by clearly showing them where the company is heading and how you want to get there.
Remember, the focus of talent development is about the future of what’s possible for the employee within the organization. Evaluating what happened after the fact often leaves employees with more challenges than opportunities. If you’re looking for ways to create a new talent development program or automate an existing one, consider Paycor Talent Development.
Paycor Talent Development helps leaders:
 Previous:
Next:
Stay up to date with the latest HR trends

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Employee satisfaction surveys are a great way to stay in tune with what your employees are thinking. Get real insights on how to engage and motivate your team.

        Article      
Read Time: 10 min
Employee burnout can impact work quality and morale. Discover the warning signs for burnout and how to prevent it in your workplace.

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Being an effective leader requires more than just technical knowledge. Create an environment where everyone can thrive and understand emotions in oneself and others.
HCM Software
HR + Payroll Software
Talent Management
Workforce Management
Employee Experience
Benefits Administration
Quick Links
Services + Support
855-565-3285
Talk to Sales
855-752-8564
© 2023 Paycor, Inc  |  Refer Paycor  |  Privacy Policy  |  1-800-501-9462 |
*Represents approximately 30,000 corporate clients covering 40,000 businesses employing people