Whistleblower Laws by State

Whistleblowers are employees who expose illegal, fraudulent or unsafe activity to internal or external authorities. Check all the FAQs about whistleblower laws.

Workforce Management
Last Updated: December 22, 2021 | Read Time: 17 min
Whistleblowers are employees who expose illegal, fraudulent or unsafe activity to internal or external authorities. From social media companies to government institutions to financial giants, whistleblower complaints against these organizations have been prominent in recent news. The federal government has dozens of whistleblower protection programs in place (going back as far as 1989) that cover employees working at most of their agencies.
A good example of a protected whistleblower is an employee at a healthcare group who discovers the facility is fraudulently billing Medicare for services they don’t perform and reports the information to management, HR or government authorities.
Whistleblowers are often protected from adverse action such as retaliation and termination by state and federal legislation, and hefty fines can be levied against violators. Depending on the level of fraudulent activity, whistleblowers can also be financially rewarded with a percentage of the money collected via settlement, which often reaches millions of dollars.
 Previous:
Next:
Stay up to date with the latest HR trends

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Employee satisfaction surveys are a great way to stay in tune with what your employees are thinking. Get real insights on how to engage and motivate your team.

        Article      
Read Time: 10 min
Employee burnout can impact work quality and morale. Discover the warning signs for burnout and how to prevent it in your workplace.

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Being an effective leader requires more than just technical knowledge. Create an environment where everyone can thrive and understand emotions in oneself and others.
HCM Software
HR + Payroll Software
Talent Management
Workforce Management
Employee Experience
Benefits Administration
Quick Links
Services + Support
855-565-3285
Talk to Sales
855-752-8564
© 2023 Paycor, Inc  |  Refer Paycor  |  Privacy Policy  |  1-800-501-9462 |
*Represents approximately 30,000 corporate clients covering 40,000 businesses employing people