The Importance of Non-Financial Incentives

Non-financial incentives are a innovative and cost-effective way for your company to motivate employees, show recognition and raise employee engagement.

Workforce Management
Last Updated:  January 9, 2020 | Read Time: 5 min
Finding, recruiting and hiring talented people is just the beginning. Keeping them motivated throughout their careers is another challenge entirely. Ideally, talented people will have such a great work ethic that they’ll stay engaged no matter how they feel. But let’s face it, how we feel influences how we approach our work.
Great managers need to become experts at keeping employees engaged—companies with highly engaged employees are more productive, have 21% higher productivity, and staff are more likely to stick around (Gallup). The problem is, though employee engagement is on the rise, it’s still only a minority of the US workforce who are engaged at work. Employee engagement is way more complex than just motivation—but, without motivation, employees aren’t going to be engaged.
So, what’s the best way to motivate employees? There’s an obvious answer… money. But non-financial incentives are worth considering in addition to compensation because in some cases they can be more effective. To some people, recognition, appreciation or increased flexibility can be more valuable than cash.
What are non-financial incentives? Recognition for a job well done is the obvious answer, but that’s just good management. The idea behind non-financial incentives is that they are incentives, meaning they are known about in advance and so give employees a little something extra to work for. Here are some examples that might work for your organization.
One final thought: remember, different people are motivated by different things.
For advice on tailoring your incentive and rewards policy to different employee types, read more here.

 Previous:
Next:
Stay up to date with the latest HR trends

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Employee satisfaction surveys are a great way to stay in tune with what your employees are thinking. Get real insights on how to engage and motivate your team.

        Article      
Read Time: 10 min
Employee burnout can impact work quality and morale. Discover the warning signs for burnout and how to prevent it in your workplace.

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Being an effective leader requires more than just technical knowledge. Create an environment where everyone can thrive and understand emotions in oneself and others.
HCM Software
HR + Payroll Software
Talent Management
Workforce Management
Employee Experience
Benefits Administration
Quick Links
Services + Support
855-565-3285
Talk to Sales
855-752-8564
© 2023 Paycor, Inc  |  Refer Paycor  |  Privacy Policy  |  1-800-501-9462 |
*Represents approximately 30,000 corporate clients covering 40,000 businesses employing people