Interview Questions to Avoid [Downloadable]

Recruiters and hiring managers need to thoroughly screen candidates, but also remain compliant with regulations. Get guidance and a list of questions to avoid, here.

Talent Management
Last Updated: May 19, 2021 | Read Time: 6 min
If you’re going to be successful as a recruiter, you need to know that the questions you ask job candidates must be job-related and non-discriminatory. Questions should focus on the essential functions, knowledge, skills, and abilities that candidates need to perform a role.  The best way to do this is to base all questions on the relevant job description for a role.
The reality is, it’s easy for recruiters to slip up—but that’s no excuse. If you’re interviewing candidates, you need to be aware of questions to avoid.
As a business, you want to hire the best talent out there. Discriminating interview practices stop that from happening. But if that wasn’t enough, interview compliance is overseen by the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC) and the Office of Federal Contract Compliance Programs (OFCCP).
The EEOC enforce civil rights laws prohibiting discrimination based on race, color, religion, national origin, sex, age (for those 40 of over), disability, sexual identity, gender identity and genetic information. These laws generally apply to companies with 15 or more employees. Meanwhile, the OFCCP is responsible for enforcing non-discriminatory practices among federal contractors. 
Both these organization have the ability to impose big penalties on non-compliant businesses.
In addition to federal laws, many states have their own laws governing interviews. Make sure you know the official guidance wherever you are. Here are topics you should be wary of inquiring about:
Even when you know the rules, it can still be challenging to formulate interview questions. The good news is, there’s always lawful way to find out all the information you need for your hiring process. To help recruiters, Paycor is offering a downloadable sample of interview questions you should avoid—paired with better, alternative questions to ask instead.
 Previous:
Next:
Stay up to date with the latest HR trends
HCM Software
HR + Payroll Software
Talent Management
Workforce Management
Employee Experience
Benefits Administration
Quick Links
Services + Support
855-565-3285
Talk to Sales
855-752-8564
© 2023 Paycor, Inc  |  Refer Paycor  |  Privacy Policy  |  1-800-501-9462 |
*Represents approximately 30,000 corporate clients covering 40,000 businesses employing people