How to Grow a Small Business – A Guide for HR

HR teams have a big role to play in growing a small business. Here are our top  business growth tips for HR, from managing labor costs to HR technology.

Employee Experience
Last Updated: December 15, 2020 | Read Time: 6 min
The goal of a small business is simple: grow. The bigger the business, the more job security for all employees, the more talented people you can hire and the better chance you have of making a difference in your industry.
In a small business, everyone chips in. Growing a business isn’t just the job of the CEO and CFO—everyone has a part to play. If you’re an HR leader (even a “team of one”), you can shape the kind of company that you want to work for and have your say in decisions that affect the business’s bottom line.
It’s hard to fix a plane when it’s in the air. The same applies to companies: the kind of workplace culture that’s put in place right at the start will have a big impact down the line. A toxic culture can only get you far. If you can instill a sense of mission, purpose and connectedness—you’ll get the kind of productive, engaged employees that can supercharge growth.
Small businesses don’t have a big budget for labor cost. To sustain growth, you need to get staffing levels just right. Too few staff and you’ll be burned out, unable to capitalize on opportunities. Hire too freely and you’ll overextend, leaving minimal to invest in other areas. Getting this balance right requires efficient scheduling and carefully tracking overtime, so you expand at precisely the right moment.
When it’s time to recruit, HR has a lot on its shoulders. A bad hire (or several) can be hard to recover from, so you’re operating with less room for error. The good news is, HR teams who create a great recruitment program — building a pipeline, tracking applicants and rewarding referrals— and then use compensation and benefits smartly to attract top talent, can add real value to a growing business. A few special hires, who stick around for the long haul, will return the investment many times over.
In a small business or startup, onboarding is famous for being pretty much nonexistent. You figure things out as you go. But HR teams can do better, and if you want engaged employees who can contribute quickly, you’ll need to. Putting in place an effective onboarding process can save new employees many wasted hours—and for a small business, every hour of labor cost matters. The sooner your team can work together, the sooner they can concentrate on growing the business.
The magic of a small business is that it’s never just the company that grows, it’s the people. Roles grow and employees gain responsibilities. Early hires end up achieving things they never thought possible. Experience is a great teacher, but it shouldn’t be the only teacher. It’s never too early to implement a learning and development program, teaching employees new skills and preparing them for challenges ahead.
Personal development goes hand in hand with performance management. With a small team, it’s important that those with high potential are recognized and given the tools they need to grow. Those who struggle should also be given the support them need to get back on track. The problem is, traditional annual reviews don’t allow this responsiveness—consider shorter, more frequent performance reviews.
In a small business, you probably won’t have a legal team on your side ready to warn you of potential trouble—instead, HR must be the champions of compliance. It’s an important role, since small mistakes can have big consequences. Staying compliant requires foresight, being prepared not just for ever-changing legislation but also knowing rules which will become relevant to you as your company grows.
HR for a small business is a big job and even if you’re managing today, what happens when there are more employees? HR technology can help—automate repetitive tasks, eliminate paperwork and giving leaders time to get out of the weeds and focus on the bigger picture. Importantly, you need software that’s scalable, so it will grow with you rather than holding you back.
 Previous:
Next:
Stay up to date with the latest HR trends

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Employee satisfaction surveys are a great way to stay in tune with what your employees are thinking. Get real insights on how to engage and motivate your team.

        Article      
Read Time: 10 min
Employee burnout can impact work quality and morale. Discover the warning signs for burnout and how to prevent it in your workplace.

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Being an effective leader requires more than just technical knowledge. Create an environment where everyone can thrive and understand emotions in oneself and others.
HCM Software
HR + Payroll Software
Talent Management
Workforce Management
Employee Experience
Benefits Administration
Quick Links
Services + Support
855-565-3285
Talk to Sales
855-752-8564
© 2023 Paycor, Inc  |  Refer Paycor  |  Privacy Policy  |  1-800-501-9462 |
*Represents approximately 30,000 corporate clients covering 40,000 businesses employing people