Navigate Remote Training for the Work-from-Home Crowd

Keeping remote teams trained and equipped with information can be challenging. See how to optimize your  training program.

Workforce Management
Last Updated: March 30, 2021 | Read Time: 7 min
Even before the pandemic (remember those days?), more than 45% of corporations reported corporate training as one of their biggest challenges. Turns out, no one felt good about all those hours spent in stuffy conference rooms. And now, COVID-19 is making training even more difficult. 
If it was a pain to get employees engaged with learning before, virtual training might feel like the worst idea. You may even be tempted to avoid the situation altogether but there are a few reasons why you should resist that urge. For one, employees want learning experiences. Ninety-one percent of employees consider learning opportunities as a key factor when deciding whether to stay in their current job or jump ship. Learning is a win/win for employers as well: studies show that organizations that invest in learning raise revenues by 11%. 
Now, the good news is that there are plenty of learning management systems (LMS) on the market that can make launching, organizing, scheduling and tracking learning programs much easier. The even better news is, the best LMS technology will do way more than just help you “check the box” on compliance. The best LMS will help your employees thrive in a remote setting and be flexible and robust enough to offer even more features and functionality when we do eventually get back to more in-person interactions. 
Consider your team. Are your employees working from home? Is there a hybrid model in place? Are your employees often on their mobile devices? In a fast-paced environment? While many of us have been forced to evolve to a virtual-first environment because of the pandemic, that is not everyone’s reality and an effective LMS should accommodate your team’s current and future reality. Fortunately, Paycor’s integrated Learning Management System is designed to make online training available to employees at any time and from anywhere from a desktop or mobile device. As you continue to make decisions about remote training for your team, we’ve outlined a few steps to get you started below:
Creating a culture of learning begins with accessibility and flexibility. Restricting trainings to a conference room, with only one available instructor on a limited network is no longer feasible for the changing workforce. By providing flexible self-led employee trainings that are accessible anywhere, you promote education and engagement with clear expectations.
How Paycor Helps: Paycor’s LMS enables learners of all abilities and positions – employee, franchisee, partner or customer – to gain anywhere, anytime access to a library of self-paced courses within an eLearning software interface that’s consistent across desktop and mobile devices.
Different roles require different learning paths. Additionally, it may be difficult for one admin to manually track course completion for every new hire. When you enable your team to personalize training without adding administrative overhead, you make the onboarding process smoother expediting the time to work. 
How Paycor Helps: Within the LMS, admins can organize training programs by groups, teams, departments or individuals. You can also schedule and track face-to-face instructor-led training sessions and track online course completion.
Promoting corporate education for a remote workforce also requires interactive, engaging learning experiences for your employees. It pays to offer a variety of training types for the different kinds of learners. By providing a visually intuitive and interactive training experience, you will capture and keep your employees’ attention whether they are on a smartphone or a desktop. 
How Paycor Helps: Learners can easily search for and find courses, consume rich content at their own pace, take notes, offer immediate feedback and learn while on the go. Create and publish professional courses easily through an advanced course builder with a simple user interface. 
Everything you need for training and education should be instantly available at you and your employees’ fingertips. Instead of having content in disparate systems or binders and hard drives, the right solution should offer all of your training materials in one place.
How Paycor Helps: Take advantage of our catalog of provided courses to begin using the LMS immediately. You can also integrate third-party resources. Additionally, Paycor’s LMS allows you to see an employee’s progress in real time. Evaluate your training success and build a bond with learners using precise feedback, real-time reporting and automated alerts whenever students reach a milestone or finish a course.
Metrics help you track the effectiveness of your LMS. When you can gather insights, you can adjust the program as necessary. In addition, metrics are often required for compliance on critical issues. 
You can protect your organization and offer employees ongoing training on industry regulations and compliance requirements with the Paycor LMS. It is also easy to update content to ensure courses are current, track completions and provide detailed reporting if you’re audited.
 Previous:
Next:
Stay up to date with the latest HR trends

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Employee satisfaction surveys are a great way to stay in tune with what your employees are thinking. Get real insights on how to engage and motivate your team.

        Article      
Read Time: 10 min
Employee burnout can impact work quality and morale. Discover the warning signs for burnout and how to prevent it in your workplace.

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Being an effective leader requires more than just technical knowledge. Create an environment where everyone can thrive and understand emotions in oneself and others.
HCM Software
HR + Payroll Software
Talent Management
Workforce Management
Employee Experience
Benefits Administration
Quick Links
Services + Support
855-565-3285
Talk to Sales
855-752-8564
© 2023 Paycor, Inc  |  Refer Paycor  |  Privacy Policy  |  1-800-501-9462 |
*Represents approximately 30,000 corporate clients covering 40,000 businesses employing people