How to Staff for Payroll Administration: Roles and Responsibilities

Issuing paychecks and maintaining tax compliant is important for every business. Read how to staff your payroll team for proper administration.

Workforce Management
Last Updated:  January 29, 2020 | Read Time: 5 min
Payroll administration is an essential function for every business. From issuing/distributing paychecks and maintaining tax compliance to calculating payroll deductions and garnishments, administrators wear several hats. If you own a business and are looking to staff your payroll department, here’s what you need to know.
Depending on the size of a business, the payroll department may have one employee or a dedicated team, all with varying levels of experience and responsibilities.
This entry level position is the grease that keeps the wheels of the payroll department rolling. They perform essential, yet routine duties.
Their responsibilities include:
This is a great entry level job for a person who likes math and has basic accounting skills. At this level, they payroll admin is going to follow a playbook, the goal is to follow a set of procedures accurately and consistently, so look for someone who gets a sense of accomplishment from checking items off a list.
If you’re looking for the Robin to your Batman, look no further. The Payroll Practitioner ll is your second in command. They perform a wide variety of record keeping and payroll processing activities. But like Robin, they still require general supervision.
Their responsibilities include:
Most intermediate payroll practitioners have 1 to 2 years of related experience and specific accounting, bookkeeping and payroll training in their toolbox.
If you’re not interested in a sidekick but rather a person who can completely take payroll duties off your hands then you’ll want to hire a Payroll Administrator. With 3 to 5 years of payroll experience and an associate degree or higher, they will be solely responsible for all payroll related activities.
These responsibilities include:
A great payroll administrator can save you time, ensure compliance and pay your employees accurately and on time, but only if they have the technology and expertise to support them.
Payroll is critical to your business, but it’s only going to get more complex as your organization grows. Here are a few ways Paycor can help:

Anyone who’s spent time in HR can tell you that payroll can be a time-consuming, overcomplicated task. But it doesn’t have to be! Paycor’s payroll software isn’t just easy-to-use, it’s a powerful tool that gives HR leaders time to focus on more strategic initiatives. So, stop wasting your time with haphazard spreadsheets and start paying your employees quickly and easily from the office, your car or from the comfort of your home.
Chances are you don’t have a dedicated tax expert in your payroll department. Without the right tax experts supporting your business, you could be vulnerable to costly penalties. Last year alone, the IRS reported a hefty $5 million in employment tax penalties as a result of misfiled paperwork and incorrect tax calculations (very common mistakes). With manual payroll processes in place, being hit with significant fines isn’t a question of “if”, but “when”.
To support your payroll department, Paycor has assembled a team of proven tax experts to assist you with payroll tax compliance and workers compensations. In just the last year, our tax team helped with more than 450,000 tax notices.
As a leader at your organization, we know that your time is extremely valuable. With employee self-service, we’ll reduce administrative processes and employee questions about tax forms, pay history and pay stubs. Our solution is designed to support your employees through direct deposit, paycards, 401(K) integrations, wage garnishments, e-child support and more.
Contact a member of our team so we can understand your business needs. Or take a self guided tour of our products to learn more about the benefits of payroll software.
 Previous:
Next:
Stay up to date with the latest HR trends

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Employee satisfaction surveys are a great way to stay in tune with what your employees are thinking. Get real insights on how to engage and motivate your team.

        Article      
Read Time: 10 min
Employee burnout can impact work quality and morale. Discover the warning signs for burnout and how to prevent it in your workplace.

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Being an effective leader requires more than just technical knowledge. Create an environment where everyone can thrive and understand emotions in oneself and others.
HCM Software
HR + Payroll Software
Talent Management
Workforce Management
Employee Experience
Benefits Administration
Quick Links
Services + Support
855-565-3285
Talk to Sales
855-752-8564
© 2023 Paycor, Inc  |  Refer Paycor  |  Privacy Policy  |  1-800-501-9462 |
*Represents approximately 30,000 corporate clients covering 40,000 businesses employing people