5 Ways to Prevent Long Restaurant Wait Times

Reducing restaurant wait times is essential for your restaurant business to reach its full potential - we discuss Human Resources can help reduce wait times.

Employee Experience
Last Updated:  January 9, 2020 | Read Time: 7 min
Turnaround time is the duration of a customer’s visit, from the time they arrive to the moment they walk out the door and, for a restaurant manager, it can be the difference between surviving and thriving. Focus entirely on speed and you’ll make mistakes. Ignore timing and you limit your capacity to meet potential demand. (And with such slim profit margins – as low as 2% according to the National Restaurant Association – every minute counts.)
While there’s a space for creative strategies – so called ‘nudges’ – for getting diners out the door faster, a restaurant manager’s first task is to speed up the parts of the process they control: mostly everything that happens between orders being taken and food served. Like a menu, every restaurant is a work in process. However, to reduce long wait times your team must work like clockwork. This requires great management – with the help of smarter HR.
Optimizing staffing levels – to ensure sufficient productivity without excessive labor cost – requires a level of precision that just isn’t possible when scheduling by spreadsheet or pen and paper. With staff scheduling software, though, you can automate many of those tricky calculations, allowing you to avoid over-staffing while getting the right people where you need them – when you need them. This way you can trim the fat off your scheduling budget – and as a result ensure a healthier business with shorter wait times.
Creating schedules is just the first step – any additional efficiency will be lost if the right staff don’t actually show up on time. Even one missing or late employee can throw the whole system out of whack, especially as more efficient schedules leave less room for error. So, it’s important to get everyone on the same page. That’s no easy challenge when, as any restaurant manager will know, staff can differ dramatically when it comes to experience and professionalism.You don’t want to have to rely on the memory of a high schooler working their first part-time job or hope that your veteran chef is checking his emails. When publishing schedules, notifying staff and sending reminders, you have to do so in the right format for each employee – whether that’s push notification, text message, or phone call.
However, the rest of the schedule can be comprised of open shifts, which other staff can ‘pick up’ – subject to management approval. Of course, if any shifts are left open, they can then be assigned. This system has the added benefit that staff feel more empowered, more in control of their lives, and more engaged with their work – no mean feat considering Gallup polling shows that only a third of American workers are actively engaged by their jobs.
The good news is, improving restaurant wait times can actually help drive employee retention. The more experience your staff have of working together, the more efficient they can be, and everyone wants to be part of a winning team. (And don’t forget, there are lots of other ways to improve employee retention, like improving benefits packages, reworking your onboarding process so that new staff feel comfortable and part of the team from the moment they begin and tailoring your recruiting process to give priority to staff who can offer long term commitment.) 
The high-wire act of balancing quality, speed and labor cost in the restaurant industry isn’t complicated – but that doesn’t mean it’s easy. The recipe for lowering restaurant wait times is engaged, well-trained, long-term employees – but as with any recipe, timing is key. For perfect timing, you need the right staff in the right place, every time. And that’s why staff scheduling software is so valuable.
 Previous:
Next:
Stay up to date with the latest HR trends

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Employee satisfaction surveys are a great way to stay in tune with what your employees are thinking. Get real insights on how to engage and motivate your team.

        Article      
Read Time: 10 min
Employee burnout can impact work quality and morale. Discover the warning signs for burnout and how to prevent it in your workplace.

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Being an effective leader requires more than just technical knowledge. Create an environment where everyone can thrive and understand emotions in oneself and others.
HCM Software
HR + Payroll Software
Talent Management
Workforce Management
Employee Experience
Benefits Administration
Quick Links
Services + Support
855-565-3285
Talk to Sales
855-752-8564
© 2023 Paycor, Inc  |  Refer Paycor  |  Privacy Policy  |  1-800-501-9462 |
*Represents approximately 30,000 corporate clients covering 40,000 businesses employing people