4 Ways To Better Manage Manufacturing Talent

Whether it’s recruiting, training or retaining skilled workers, talent management remains a huge priority and challenge for manufacturers across the board. Read on to learn the best practices.

Employee Experience
Last Updated:  November 13, 2020 | Read Time: 6 min
Whether it’s recruiting, training or retaining skilled workers, talent management remains a huge priority and challenge for manufacturers across the board.
In a recent PricewaterhouseCoopers (PwC) survey of manufacturing executives, 60 percent said that creating a skilled workforce is a top priority.
Moreover, a Deloitte study estimated that as many as 2.4 million factory jobs could remain unfilled through 2028 because of a tightening labor market and manufacturing talent shortage. And while the lasting impact of COVID-19 has yet to be seen, the pandemic caused an unprecedented disruption in manufacturing and compounded the labor issues.
So given this current industry landscape, what are some of the biggest talent management challenges manufacturers face?
Baby Boomers continue to have a huge impact on the American economy. The manufacturing sector is no different. Deloitte estimates that 2.6 million workers will retire from the manufacturing workforce over the next decade, leaving a huge gap to fill.
As the economy expands, competition among manufacturers for reliable, skilled workers is intensifying, making the task of recruiting even harder.
As manufacturers focus on keeping up with technology, their workers will need to be trained and retrained to keep up with the demands of automation and robotics as well as upgrades in traditional equipment. Gone are the days when a worker could focus on a single task in the assembly process.
Let’s face it, most young people these days don’t list “factory worker” as one of their career ambitions. Manufacturing plants have historically been tainted with a reputation of being a loud, dangerous, and generally unpleasant work environment. Manufacturing HR teams have their work cut out for them.
Paycor specializes in talent management for the manufacturing industry. Here are four practical ways HR teams can help their companies meet these challenges.
In order to get a head start on other companies, manufacturers should begin actively recruiting—even at high schools. Connecting with students early can help build a positive image of your company as a desirable place to work. It’s also important to educate the parents that manufacturing can make a promising career.
For instance, manufacturing leaders can invite local high school students to work part-time to give them an opportunity to see what the job is about without racking up college debt. And if parents understood their child could leave high school and get into a trade making as much money as they would have their first year out of college—without the college bills—they could be more prone to choose manufacturing as a career.
Manufacturers should focus on creating a work environment that is both challenging and engaging, and that offers ample opportunity for advancement. This means being more flexible with career-path mobility, training and scheduling, as well as offering competitive benefits packages.
With this in mind, HR teams will need to be more proactive in helping management identify the workers who have the aptitude and desire to grow their skillsets. Paycor’s Learning Management Solution can help facilitate and track your training programs.
For example, consider splitting your traditional HR team into separate roles: HR and Talent. Each team has separate goals and leadership. This new structure allows the Talent team to focus on recruiting and retaining workers, while the HR team handles the more traditional, day-to-day responsibilities.
Given the increasing importance of talent management in manufacturing, perhaps your HR team would benefit from a re-evaluation of its current organizational structure. Paycor’s mission is to continue finding new and innovative ways to help HR teams better achieve the goals of their businesses. As manufacturers adapt and evolve to meet the challenges and opportunities in the marketplace, their HR teams will play a key role in recruiting and developing the skilled workforces they will need to succeed.

 Previous:
Next:
Stay up to date with the latest HR trends

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Employee satisfaction surveys are a great way to stay in tune with what your employees are thinking. Get real insights on how to engage and motivate your team.

        Article      
Read Time: 10 min
Employee burnout can impact work quality and morale. Discover the warning signs for burnout and how to prevent it in your workplace.

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Being an effective leader requires more than just technical knowledge. Create an environment where everyone can thrive and understand emotions in oneself and others.
HCM Software
HR + Payroll Software
Talent Management
Workforce Management
Employee Experience
Benefits Administration
Quick Links
Services + Support
855-565-3285
Talk to Sales
855-752-8564
© 2023 Paycor, Inc  |  Refer Paycor  |  Privacy Policy  |  1-800-501-9462 |
*Represents approximately 30,000 corporate clients covering 40,000 businesses employing people