Ask HR: Employee Cell Phones: Can We Ban Them?

Paycor's HR Support Center answers the question, can employers ban their employees' use of cell phones while in the office?

Employee Experience
Last Updated:  February 22, 2016 | Read Time: 4 min
What is a more ubiquitous technology than cell phones? Everyone has
them, from children to adults to…your employees. How do you manage

when cell phone usage on the job gets out of hand at your company? The
pros at
HR

Support Center recently tackled this tricky question.
Question:
What are the laws regarding cell phones at work? Personal use by our
employees has gotten out of hand. Can we change our policy to say that
cell phones are not permitted on the premises?
Answer from Sarah, HR Pro:
Thank you for your question. I can certainly understand the frustration
of having employees on their phones frequently and the need to implement
a policy to limit this use. There is no law saying you cannot implement
a policy prohibiting cell phones on the property, but I would recommend
a different approach.
Banning cell phones from the property would likely decrease employee
morale as there are times (e.g., break times or family emergencies) when
employees may need to be able to make or take personal calls. Instead
of restricting phones altogether, you could instead restrict cell phone
use to break times and to designated areas away from employee
workstations where an employee can make those phone calls.
In either situation, eliminating all calls or restricting use, you will
want to address how your employee’s family members will reach them
during working hours in case of a true emergency. One option is to have
the calls filter through your reception desk. Alternately, it may be a
good idea to have a second line to your company that is for employee
emergencies.
Whatever you decide, you need to hold your employees accountable to

the standards you set. Employees who fail to adhere to these standards
should be disciplined according to your policy.
Sarah
has extensive Human Resources experience in the legal, software,
security and property preservation industries. She has a Business
Communications degree from Villa Julie College (now Stevenson
University) and a master’s certificate in Human Resources Management and
a Strategic Organizational Leadership certification from Villa Nova
University. Sarah is also a member of the National Society of Human
Resources Management and has managed the HR function for small startup
companies to mid-sized/large organizations.
Do you have questions like this? One entire year of
HR

Support Center is cheaper than just one hour of a typical attorney’s
time.
Ask

us instead.
Enter your email below to receive a weekly recap of the latest articles
from Paycor’s Resource Center.


MktoForms2.loadForm("//app-ab01.marketo.com", "003-JWW-697", 1796);
Check your inbox

for an email confirming your subscription. Enjoy!
 Previous:
Next:
Stay up to date with the latest HR trends

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Employee satisfaction surveys are a great way to stay in tune with what your employees are thinking. Get real insights on how to engage and motivate your team.

        Article      
Read Time: 10 min
Employee burnout can impact work quality and morale. Discover the warning signs for burnout and how to prevent it in your workplace.

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Being an effective leader requires more than just technical knowledge. Create an environment where everyone can thrive and understand emotions in oneself and others.
HCM Software
HR + Payroll Software
Talent Management
Workforce Management
Employee Experience
Benefits Administration
Quick Links
Services + Support
855-565-3285
Talk to Sales
855-752-8564
© 2023 Paycor, Inc  |  Refer Paycor  |  Privacy Policy  |  1-800-501-9462 |
*Represents approximately 30,000 corporate clients covering 40,000 businesses employing people