The Importance of Creating an Inclusive Workplace

Inclusion differs from diversity. See the distinction and learn how to create an inclusive workplace for your organization.

Employee Experience
Last Updated: August 4, 2021 | Read Time: 4 min
Imagine you’re on a rec league team, playing pickup basketball games once a week. You don’t know the people you’re playing with, and none of them make an effort to include you in sideline chit-chat or the inside jokes they share. You definitely wouldn’t call this an inclusive group, and you probably wouldn’t show up for many more games.
Now apply that situation to work. Would you be happy in the office if nobody makes an effort to include you in social conversations or makes no effort to learn more about your background? Would you be willing to put forth extra effort for a place where you don’t feel you belong? This is why creating an inclusive culture is essential to your organization’s success.
Before going forward, it’s a good idea to define what inclusion is, and how it differs from diversity. Simply put, having a diverse roster of employees won’t make a difference to a company’s bottom line if those individuals do not feel welcomed. Inclusion is necessary to make any diversity efforts succeed. Companies can use a variety of training, effective communication and working to embrace an employee’s uniqueness to help build an inclusive culture.
As noted earlier, creating a culture of inclusion allows employees of varied backgrounds to thrive. Bringing this rich variety of backgrounds and experiences to the workplace is a proven way to improve company performance in ways that make it to the bottom line. A recent McKinsey study found companies with executive diversity were consistently more profitable than companies with less diversity among executives, so, it’s clear that inclusion and diversity efforts are vital to building a successful company.
Wondering if your organization is inclusive? Here are some questions to ask:
If you believe your organization has work to do to become more inclusive, consider building more training around inclusivity as part of your ongoing employee development program. Also, consider adding Employee Resource Groups. These employee-led groups can support the unique challenges faced by underrepresented groups. Finally, look at diversity when selecting leaders. When employees see leaders who look like them, they have a deeper sense of belonging.  
 Previous:
Next:
Stay up to date with the latest HR trends

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Employee satisfaction surveys are a great way to stay in tune with what your employees are thinking. Get real insights on how to engage and motivate your team.

        Article      
Read Time: 10 min
Employee burnout can impact work quality and morale. Discover the warning signs for burnout and how to prevent it in your workplace.

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Being an effective leader requires more than just technical knowledge. Create an environment where everyone can thrive and understand emotions in oneself and others.
HCM Software
HR + Payroll Software
Talent Management
Workforce Management
Employee Experience
Benefits Administration
Quick Links
Services + Support
855-565-3285
Talk to Sales
855-752-8564
© 2023 Paycor, Inc  |  Refer Paycor  |  Privacy Policy  |  1-800-501-9462 |
*Represents approximately 30,000 corporate clients covering 40,000 businesses employing people