What Is Full Life Cycle Recruiting?

Every hiring professional should be aware of full life cycle recruiting. Learn how the comprehensive approach to talent acquisition can help your organization.

Talent Management
Last Updated:  October 4, 2019 | Read Time: 5 min
Life cycle recruiting, also known as full life cycle recruiting, is a comprehensive approach to talent acquisition that encompasses every stage of the hiring process, from initial job requisition, all the way through onboarding.
Realistically, every hiring professional should take a full life cycle approach to recruiting. However, full cycle recruiting is most applicable to growing small and medium-sized companies. At such organizations, HR and Recruiting departments are not heavily siloed nor segmented, so hiring professionals act as de facto jack of all trades, playing a role in every aspect of the recruitment life cycle.
 
If you find that you manage many or most of the following tasks, congratulations…you’re a full cycle recruiter.

The reality is, hiring a new employee involves far more than posting a job description and interviewing candidates. Recruiting is driven by an integrated, linear series of yes / no decision points that make up the recruitment lifecycle.
A lot of steps right? And a ton of responsibility. This is what makes full cycle recruiting so exciting. At the same time, however, it can become overwhelming, especially when one small team or just one individual is tasked with managing everything.
Luckily, there are systems available that can help you manage every stage of the recruitment life cycle. Recruiting and hiring software, commonly referred to as applicant tracking systems, provide a platform where full life cycle recruiting can be managed from one centralized place.
Paycor Recruiting was designed by recruiting professionals for HR hiring teams, so it actually thinks and behaves like a recruiter.
Learn more about how Paycor Recruiting can help you achieve your hiring goals.
Post to free job boards, reward your employees for their referrals and more, with just a few clicks.
Check out our guided tour for more information on our product functionality. Or if you’d like to talk to our team, click the button below.
 Previous:
Next:
Stay up to date with the latest HR trends

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Employee satisfaction surveys are a great way to stay in tune with what your employees are thinking. Get real insights on how to engage and motivate your team.

        Article      
Read Time: 10 min
Employee burnout can impact work quality and morale. Discover the warning signs for burnout and how to prevent it in your workplace.

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Being an effective leader requires more than just technical knowledge. Create an environment where everyone can thrive and understand emotions in oneself and others.
HCM Software
HR + Payroll Software
Talent Management
Workforce Management
Employee Experience
Benefits Administration
Quick Links
Services + Support
855-565-3285
Talk to Sales
855-752-8564
© 2023 Paycor, Inc  |  Refer Paycor  |  Privacy Policy  |  1-800-501-9462 |
*Represents approximately 30,000 corporate clients covering 40,000 businesses employing people