Why Pay-As-You-Go Workers’ Comp May Be a Smart Solution for Your Business

Workers’ compensation insurance is required by law for businesses. Pay As You Go workers’ comp is a solution that consolidates payments into payroll runs.

Employee Experience
Last Updated: June 27, 2022 | Read Time: 6 min
The purpose of workers’ compensation (or workers’ comp) is to cover an employee’s medical costs and lost wages due to any work-related injury. Workers’ comp is required by law and governed by individual states.
The concept of compensating workers for injuries received on the job has existed in some form or another for a surprising number of years. Thousands, in fact. Payments for injury or loss of limb date back to around 2000 BC. Though the extent of protection for workers has differed in every culture throughout the last forty centuries, it’s not a new idea.
Companies don’t deliberately set out to endanger employees, and the majority of organizations implement safety precautions to prevent workplace injuries. But accidents still happen. The good news for businesses is that the mandatory expense of a workers’ compensation policy comes with employer protections.
Workers’ comp is considered an “exclusive remedy” because employees agree to the promise of timely payments for job-related injuries instead of filing a lawsuit. Coverage not only protects your employees, but it also limits your exposure.
When a business chooses to (illegally) not carry the insurance, injured employees can file civil lawsuits against their employers. Unless negligence is to blame, workers’ comp will keep business owners from being held personally liable and owing sizable settlements. Employers that disregard the law face stiff fines and even criminal charges.
When employers delve into the world of workers’ comp, they’re often left wondering why the term “comp” doesn’t instead stand for “comp”-licated. While well-intended, the complex rules governing coverage, codes, and proper classifications can flap even the unflappable. The calculations used to determine the cost of workers’ compensation coverage are based on the type of work, industry, and number of employees, and can be easily misinterpreted.
It takes dedication and focus to grow a company and consistently achieve organizational goals. Managing workers’ comp on top of everything else a company handles can be a challenge. If you’re looking for ways to streamline processes and maximize productivity, pay-as-you-go workers’ compensation may be the solution you need.
Consolidating workers’ comp payments with payroll simplifies business management. Instead of paying a separate insurance invoice, the premium is automatically deducted with each payroll.
Pay-as-you-go offers these other valuable benefits that can help you better manage coverage, avoid risk, and stay compliant.
Consolidating workers’ comp payments with payroll simplifies management for employers. Instead of paying insurance invoices separately, the premium is automatically deducted with each payroll.
Pay-As-You-Go offers these valuable benefits businesses need to better manage coverage, avoid risk, and stay compliant.
Pay-as-you-go workers’ compensation is available in all U.S. states except North Dakota, Ohio (with some exceptions), Washington, and Wyoming, which are considered monopolistic states with their own state-run workers’ compensation programs.
Workers’ comp is a required part of doing business, but it doesn’t have to be a burden. Would you hire a tailor to run your sales team? Probably not. Leveraging tools and services provided by experts designed to improve complex processes lets you focus on running your business.
Every employer needs to protect themselves, their employees, and their cash flow. Contact us to see how your business can benefit from a pay-as-you-go workers’ comp plan.
 Previous:
Next:
Stay up to date with the latest HR trends

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Employee satisfaction surveys are a great way to stay in tune with what your employees are thinking. Get real insights on how to engage and motivate your team.

        Article      
Read Time: 10 min
Employee burnout can impact work quality and morale. Discover the warning signs for burnout and how to prevent it in your workplace.

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Being an effective leader requires more than just technical knowledge. Create an environment where everyone can thrive and understand emotions in oneself and others.
HCM Software
HR + Payroll Software
Talent Management
Workforce Management
Employee Experience
Benefits Administration
Quick Links
Services + Support
855-565-3285
Talk to Sales
855-752-8564
© 2023 Paycor, Inc  |  Refer Paycor  |  Privacy Policy  |  1-800-501-9462 |
*Represents approximately 30,000 corporate clients covering 40,000 businesses employing people