Expert Round-Up: How Can HR Pros Be Seen as More Strategic?

Calling all HR professionals! Step up to the plate and become more strategic with these expert tips from authors and industry leaders.

Employee Experience
Last Updated: July 20, 2017 | Read Time: 5 min
Human resource professionals today are feeling the pressure to be more
strategic. Many organizations still treat HR as a transactional,
tactical department that does not add much value, yet HR has a lot of
expertise to offer. How can HR professionals take their places at the
executive table? We polled a few HR experts for their insights.
The first step HR professionals can take to be seen as strategic is to
develop greater business acumen, or learning to talk the
talk. “They need to be able to tie recommendations, people programs,
and recognition (including pay) to the goals of the business,” says
Susan. “They need to be able to talk in language that other company
leaders use when they make recommendations.”
HR professionals have much to contribute about issues such as increasing
employee productivity, contribution and engagement—but they must
explain why it matters to the business and how it can be achieved.
For Suzanne, it all comes down to talent. She puts it simply: “Good
people make good businesses.” For HR to truly become more strategic,
they need to put time and energy towards bringing great people into the
organization, keeping them there and developing their potential.
Allison recommends that HR take on the role of the advisor. She
suggests that HR pros “ask probing questions and get your business
partners thinking about how their business decisions will impact the
actual people in the roles.”
She also strongly believes in tying numbers to the big picture.
“Present the HR metrics and the impact of those metrics,” she
recommends. “Help your business understand the ‘why’ behind the metrics.
How do the people metrics tie to the business metrics? For example, how
does turnover affect customer satisfaction?”
According to Erik, HR professionals are often perceived as not liking or
understanding data. His advice is to: “Disrupt that way of thinking by
developing HR analytics and systems that not only support your
organization’s operations but help to drive its strategy.” He encourages
HR to embrace the Big Data trend by recognizing that “you can’t have
strong predictive analytics if you’re not owning foundational items like
metrics and benchmarking.”
Erik urges HR professionals to align their goals with the goals of the
business. “Your toolbox should match what you want to build!” For
instance, if the company’s goal is to be best-in-class, HR must embrace
the technology they need to get there. “Great organizations need great
HR leaders in tune with technology and how that technology can reduce
transactions and build value.”
Lastly, Erik believes the HR profession is trending towards human
capital management. As such, he claims that “It’s not enough for HR to
call itself a business partner; it needs to look at its processes,
systems, ways of thinking, and where it rests in the organization in
order to not just add value, but create value.”
To be a strategic partner, HR professionals must first learn the business. HR leaders at Paycor believe these are the key questions:
Next, HR professionals should focus on building relationships throughout
the business, again asking themselves a series of questions:
Lastly, HR pros must seek to understand, form a point
of view and be able to suggest solutions. By being able to answer all of
the questions above, HR starts to form answers and get an understanding
for how to drive the organization forward.
Looking for more tips on becoming more strategic and making a bigger
impact on your organization? Check out our whitepaper, The HR Pro’s
Guide: 5 Ways to Make an Impact at
Work. Also be sure to check out our HR Center of Excellence for more information on strategies you can use to recruit, manage labor costs, and improve the employee experience.
Being a featured expert in this post does not necessarily represent an
endorsement of Paycor and our products. This content is provided for
informational purposes only.
 Previous:
Next:
Stay up to date with the latest HR trends

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Employee satisfaction surveys are a great way to stay in tune with what your employees are thinking. Get real insights on how to engage and motivate your team.

        Article      
Read Time: 10 min
Employee burnout can impact work quality and morale. Discover the warning signs for burnout and how to prevent it in your workplace.

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Being an effective leader requires more than just technical knowledge. Create an environment where everyone can thrive and understand emotions in oneself and others.
HCM Software
HR + Payroll Software
Talent Management
Workforce Management
Employee Experience
Benefits Administration
Quick Links
Services + Support
855-565-3285
Talk to Sales
855-752-8564
© 2023 Paycor, Inc  |  Refer Paycor  |  Privacy Policy  |  1-800-501-9462 |
*Represents approximately 30,000 corporate clients covering 40,000 businesses employing people