Weathering the storm: Navigating the nursing shortage

The nursing industry has been plagued by staffing shortages for some time and things do not appear to be getting better any time soon. Read on to learn how to handle the nursing shortage.

Employee Experience
Last Updated:  September 10, 2020 | Read Time: 5 min
The nursing industry has been plagued by staffing shortages for some time and things do not appear to be getting better any time soon. There are several reasons for this ominous forecast.
First, is the demanding nature of the job. Nurses typically work long shifts in physically taxing and stressful environments. These conditions have led to higher burnout and turnover rates. Many nurses also have competing family priorities that lead them away from the workforce.
Another reason is the rapidly-aging U.S. population. As the baby-boomer generation enters retirement age, they are using more medical products and services than ever, taxing an already strained healthcare system. Additionally, according to a 2018 survey, half of the nation’s RNs are over 50 years old. This means a significant portion of nurses are getting ready to retire at a time when they are going to be needed the most.
A third reason is the rise of competing opportunities that are taking nurses out of the traditional roles in hospitals and nursing homes. According to Dr. Cathy Rozmus, vice dean of academic affairs at the University of Texas Health Science Center Houston, “In the 1960s, if you were a nurse you likely worked in a hospital. Now you can work in a clinic, in advanced practice delivering primary care services. You can get a Master’s or a Ph.D. and teach. The kinds of things nurses do have expanded like a sponge.”
And a fourth reason is the lack of educators in nursing programs across the country. This has caused an education bottleneck that is limiting the number of new nurses seeking to enter the field each year. In 2018, more than 75,000 otherwise qualified applicants were turned away from nursing schools simply due to faculty shortages.
These four factors are converging to create a perfect storm: a rapid influx of patients compounded by a growing shortage of nurses.
And that was all before the COVID-9 pandemic hit.
But there is a flicker of hope on the horizon. The Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) has allocated $5 billion of healthcare funding specifically earmarked for nursing homes. The funds are designed to help LTC facilities augment their skilled nursing staff and bring in new recruits to the frontlines.
However, to qualify for funding, nursing home facilities will need to meet certain requirements such as participating in 23 online COVID training modules and submitting to State inspections.
Nursing home and long-term care facilities that do qualify will need a creative strategy in place to make the most of these HHS funds. Below are some suggestions to help you think outside the box and make the most of each dollar.
As LTC facilities navigate the rough seas ahead, this potential HHS funding can help you both bring on new nurses and improve the work-life balance and job satisfaction of your current staff. Building a work environment where your skilled nurses are energized and empowered will significantly improve the quality care you provide for your patients.

 Previous:
Next:
Stay up to date with the latest HR trends

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Employee satisfaction surveys are a great way to stay in tune with what your employees are thinking. Get real insights on how to engage and motivate your team.

        Article      
Read Time: 10 min
Employee burnout can impact work quality and morale. Discover the warning signs for burnout and how to prevent it in your workplace.

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Being an effective leader requires more than just technical knowledge. Create an environment where everyone can thrive and understand emotions in oneself and others.
HCM Software
HR + Payroll Software
Talent Management
Workforce Management
Employee Experience
Benefits Administration
Quick Links
Services + Support
855-565-3285
Talk to Sales
855-752-8564
© 2023 Paycor, Inc  |  Refer Paycor  |  Privacy Policy  |  1-800-501-9462 |
*Represents approximately 30,000 corporate clients covering 40,000 businesses employing people