Mental Health At Work: Helping Employees Cope During COVID-19

COVID-19 is impacting the mental health of workers. See 5 ways leaders can help their teams cope.

Employee Experience
Last Updated: January 13, 2022 | Read Time: 5 min
January 13, 2022 Update: The Supreme Court ruled to block the proposed vaccine-or-test mandate for large employers (businesses with 100 employees or more). In a separate ruling, the court voted in favor of a vaccine mandate for workers employed at healthcare facilities that receive federal funding through Medicare and Medicaid. It’s estimated that this ruling could affect more than 17 million workers.
For healthcare organizations and employers that choose to establish vaccination and testing requirements, Paycor is here to support you with an immunization tracker, expert HR advice and a comprehensive suite of products to help keep your business compliant. Contact our team or learn more here.
Pre-COVID-19, mental health awareness was a national conversation (and for good reason). In just four years, depressive symptoms among U.S. workers rose 18%, according to Happify. And now COVID-19 has made it even worse. People’s lives have been disrupted. Loneliness, depression, job loss, balancing working from home with kids, family members and friends are all taking a toll on the mental health of employees.
Here are 5 ways business leaders can reduce stress and uncertainty for their employees during this difficult time:
One of the main causes of anxiety is uncertainty. So, having a solid communication strategy can go a long way. As your organization makes hard decisions, be transparent and upfront. Nothing is worse than blindsiding your employees. Give them time to make decisions for themselves and their families. That’s one thing they will absolutely appreciate.
Pro Tip: Determine a communication cadence and stick with it! Will it be daily or weekly?
If your employees find themselves overwhelmed between health concerns, family issues and workloads, employee burnout will increase among your ranks. So, give them permission to disconnect and unplug.
Encourage employees to:
Pro Tip: Train your managers to look for these warning signs of employee burnout: irritability, cynicism and the inability to concentrate or remember important things or details.
There are many reasons why—even now—employees aren’t forward in disclosing their mental health. First, mental health is still fairly taboo. Secondly, during the crisis employees don’t want to give employers a reason to doubt their productivity.
Pro Tip: Encourage employees to be open and honest. Let them know that you understand they may have some anxiety and confusion. If they’re looking for help or support, they shouldn’t be afraid to ask for it.
One of the biggest stressors during this crisis is caring for children and loved ones. With school closures, employees working from home are not only stressed about their everyday work, they’re also concerned about at-home schooling, making meals and keeping their children healthy and safe.
To support employees, try:
Pro Tip: During this difficult time, the human element of your workforce needs to be a top priority. 
Solid two-way communication starts with the leaders at your organization. Managers need to listen to workers and be trained to identify or recognize the symptoms of stress, burnout and depression.
If you’re looking for a place to start, here are some recommendations from the CDC to help reduce the stress of employees:
Pro Tip: Your managers and leaders are likely feeling the stress of COVID-19 as well. Be sure to provide them with outlets and resources too.
Paycor is publishing expert advice, webinars, articles and templates for SMB leaders navigating the COVID-19 public health emergency on our Coronavirus Support Center.
 Previous:
Next:
Stay up to date with the latest HR trends

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Employee satisfaction surveys are a great way to stay in tune with what your employees are thinking. Get real insights on how to engage and motivate your team.

        Article      
Read Time: 10 min
Employee burnout can impact work quality and morale. Discover the warning signs for burnout and how to prevent it in your workplace.

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Being an effective leader requires more than just technical knowledge. Create an environment where everyone can thrive and understand emotions in oneself and others.
HCM Software
HR + Payroll Software
Talent Management
Workforce Management
Employee Experience
Benefits Administration
Quick Links
Services + Support
855-565-3285
Talk to Sales
855-752-8564
© 2023 Paycor, Inc  |  Refer Paycor  |  Privacy Policy  |  1-800-501-9462 |
*Represents approximately 30,000 corporate clients covering 40,000 businesses employing people