3 Steps to Promote Professional Growth in Virtual Offices

With many employees now working virtually it can be easy to forget about career growth. Get 3 tips on how to further virtual employee growth.

Employee Experience
Last Updated:  January 26, 2021 | Read Time: 5 min
Prompted by necessity, many companies have revolutionized their recruitment, hiring, and onboarding efforts.
Much of the HR process can be automated, and 2020 pushed companies to react quickly and find new ways of filling talent gaps. However, hiring managers now need to integrate HCM tech and digital team management processes into their day-to-day.
Since more and more companies are adopting a remote-first approach, putting professional growth initiatives on hold until physical office spaces rebound isn’t the best way forward.
Ongoing employee management and professional growth are business necessities, but few companies delved into remote team management technology or stipulated professional growth as essential while we all settled into our living-room-come-office-space. Now it’s time for that to change.
How can HR professionals get the right leaders to back remote growth initiatives? Start by explaining to execs that, because of technology advancements and new ways of global expansion that are continuing to evolve, there are different opportunities in innovation, not fewer.
Remote schooling and a greater need for caregiving relatives impacted family obligations in 2020. Simultaneously, many professionals are in long-term isolation without their usual social or support network. Is there a way to step in and support, without creating extra jobs for the already busy HR team?
Part of digital collaboration is videocalls, but these should not become a crutch or your sole route to communication. Moreover, we need to consider the future possibility of hybrid workplaces where employees might be fully or only partially remote. What are the alternatives or add-ons for effective remote team management?
It is possible to continue training and collaborating closely, regardless of where employees are based. While all the above points will help kickstart positive remote management, long-term improvements come from trial and error. So, keep the communication channels open and don’t be afraid to rework professional growth plans mid-year. After all, we’re all experiencing this for the first time, so there’s no shame in recognizing where improvements can be made.
People teams know that ongoing professional growth is important for companies’ long-term growth. Once leadership is on board with the idea that this is a necessity, a productive partnership between remote teams and their HR counterparts can begin.
 Previous:
Next:
Stay up to date with the latest HR trends

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Employee satisfaction surveys are a great way to stay in tune with what your employees are thinking. Get real insights on how to engage and motivate your team.

        Article      
Read Time: 10 min
Employee burnout can impact work quality and morale. Discover the warning signs for burnout and how to prevent it in your workplace.

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Being an effective leader requires more than just technical knowledge. Create an environment where everyone can thrive and understand emotions in oneself and others.
HCM Software
HR + Payroll Software
Talent Management
Workforce Management
Employee Experience
Benefits Administration
Quick Links
Services + Support
855-565-3285
Talk to Sales
855-752-8564
© 2023 Paycor, Inc  |  Refer Paycor  |  Privacy Policy  |  1-800-501-9462 |
*Represents approximately 30,000 corporate clients covering 40,000 businesses employing people