Employers Guide to Pre-employment Background Check & Screenings

Employers have several pre-employment background checks, in addition to criminal history reports, they can run when hiring new employees.

Talent Management
Last Updated: June 24, 2022 | Read Time: 7 min
When people think of background checks, basic criminal history reports come to mind. However, there are lots of different employment screens that you can run based on your needs. Below, we provide an overview of the most common background checks employers use.
The most common background checks for employers are criminal record searches. To run a criminal record search on your job applicants, you have several options to choose from:
County criminal history searches are the most common form of criminal background check. These searches allow employers to pull reports from court records of specific counties. Information that can be obtained from county criminal background checks includes the degree of the offense (felony, misdemeanor, infraction, etc.), the date of the offense, the disposition code, sentencing details, and other information regarding the case.
The national criminal database search allows you to expand the scope of your criminal background check. Rather than only searching the counties or states where a candidate has lived and worked, the national criminal database search enables you to search databases from all 50 states, Washington D.C., Guam, and Puerto Rico.
The federal criminal database search pulls records from all 94 U.S. federal courts and will return any violations of Federal laws. Federal violations include white-collar crimes, fraud, embezzlement, tax evasion, illegal sale of firearms, pornographic exploitation of children and so on. Because of the nature of these crimes, federal criminal background checks are often performed on C-level executives, CPAs, financial and banking staff, and other employees with access to financial information.
The Social Security Number Trace and Address History search allows you to confirm that your candidate is who they say they are. The social security trace returns all of the names (including aliases) and addresses associated with a given SSN.
It is important to note that SSN trace findings are not part of the consumer report and the findings can’t be used as a basis for employment decisions. The SSN trace serves only to establish the true identity of a candidate and helps you to locate the jurisdictions where you should search for public records.
How certain can you be that a candidate has in fact accomplished everything that they claim? Education and Employer Verification checks allow you to be certain that your candidate “walks the walk.” Through education background checks, you can verify the dates that a candidate attended an institution, the majors that they studied, and the degrees that they earned. Employer background checks can be run to confirm employment history, unveiling information such as the dates of employment periods, titles held, and salary levels attained.
In today’s climate, it is not uncommon to consider a doing social media background check. However, you’ll want to be sure you are conducting this in the most legitimate way possible. An appropriate social media background check requires a request from a third-party with explicit screening criteria (racism, sexually explicit content, illegal activity or violence); not using the human resources department to search all of the channels for a candidate’s name. Be very careful when adding this component; an out-of-compliance process could lead to claims of discrimination.
Conducting a background check or pre-employment screening requires the handling of sensitive personal identifiable information (PII), which is why many companies use a legally compliant third party to conduct screenings. Background screening services or background check providers should be compliant with the Federal Trade Commission and the Fair Credit Reporting Act. If background checks are a part of your hiring process, you’ll want to be sure to have a policy in place to share with the third party you employ, with job candidates or in the event of an audit.
With so many different options for background checks, finding the right provider to meet your needs is time-consuming. Once you choose a provider, coordinating with them to track the progress of your background checks can be a major hassle. To add to this, if you do not have a safe and systematic approach for handling data, you can end up storing personally identifiable information (PII), which can get you in serious trouble.
You need an Applicant Tracking System that keeps things simple. Paycor Recruiting integrates with leading background screening experts to keep your employees and your business safe. To learn more, contact one of our expert consultants today.
 Previous:
Next:
Stay up to date with the latest HR trends

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Employee satisfaction surveys are a great way to stay in tune with what your employees are thinking. Get real insights on how to engage and motivate your team.

        Article      
Read Time: 10 min
Employee burnout can impact work quality and morale. Discover the warning signs for burnout and how to prevent it in your workplace.

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Being an effective leader requires more than just technical knowledge. Create an environment where everyone can thrive and understand emotions in oneself and others.
HCM Software
HR + Payroll Software
Talent Management
Workforce Management
Employee Experience
Benefits Administration
Quick Links
Services + Support
855-565-3285
Talk to Sales
855-752-8564
© 2023 Paycor, Inc  |  Refer Paycor  |  Privacy Policy  |  1-800-501-9462 |
*Represents approximately 30,000 corporate clients covering 40,000 businesses employing people