The Benefits of Retail Scheduling Software

Affordable retail scheduling software from Paycor, with easy-to-use time tracking app, saves your business time and money. Request a demo today!

Workforce Management
Last Updated:  January 9, 2020 | Read Time: 3 min
Say goodbye to scheduling headaches—never again do you need to schedule retail staff by spreadsheet, or (even worse) by pen and paper. Paycor’s retail employee scheduling software saves managers time and money while empowering staff. Raise productivity by creating more efficient schedules in less time, and avoiding short staffing or shift conflicts by allowing staff to sort out their own scheduling dilemmas through the Paycor Scheduling app.
Scheduling in the retail sector is notoriously difficult. Retail employee scheduling has to take into account ever-changing seasonal, part-time, and student staff, many working two jobs, with irregular shifts and frequent last-minute changes. Paycor’s scheduling software helps managers create balanced schedules to accommodate employees while maximizing business revenue.
Scheduling: The ultimate scheduling software for retail
Add or remove staff, without creating a whole new schedule — essential for seasonal or temporary employees. Manage all retail stores at once, even if they’re located in multiple countries. Easily import your current schedule, whether you use spreadsheets or even pen and paper.
Easy Shift Swapping: Facilitate schedule changes in retail
Our retail scheduling software allows employees to request time off, pick up open shifts or trade shifts with other employees, even on smartphone. Managers can choose to approve or decline these requests.
Scheduling App On-The-Go: Mobile functionality for the retail sector
Our mobile retail scheduling apps help you manage your staff wherever you are. View and edit schedules, view coverage, or respond to requests, all from the palm of your hand.
Our retail scheduling app helps companies of all sizes be more productive.

 Previous:
Next:
Stay up to date with the latest HR trends

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Employee satisfaction surveys are a great way to stay in tune with what your employees are thinking. Get real insights on how to engage and motivate your team.

        Article      
Read Time: 10 min
Employee burnout can impact work quality and morale. Discover the warning signs for burnout and how to prevent it in your workplace.

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Being an effective leader requires more than just technical knowledge. Create an environment where everyone can thrive and understand emotions in oneself and others.
HCM Software
HR + Payroll Software
Talent Management
Workforce Management
Employee Experience
Benefits Administration
Quick Links
Services + Support
855-565-3285
Talk to Sales
855-752-8564
© 2023 Paycor, Inc  |  Refer Paycor  |  Privacy Policy  |  1-800-501-9462 |
*Represents approximately 30,000 corporate clients covering 40,000 businesses employing people