How to Hire From an Increased Talent Pool

The labor market has quickly changed and the talent pool has grown. Learn how to improve your hiring.

Talent Management
Last Updated:  June 5, 2020 | Read Time: 5 min
After years of a tight labor market, SMBs are now facing a radically changed recruitment landscape. Unemployment peaked in late spring, reaching levels unseen since the Great Depression, and the economy lost 20.5 million jobs in April alone. Though employment is now rising again, for most companies just surviving is still the goal.
But even if the focus is on cutting costs now, it’s still important to think about the future and to keep an eye on building the right team. When you do get back to hiring, you’ll find that a lot has changed.
Most everyone right now is focused on their 60/90/190 day cash flow. But for those with the capacity to hire, this a unique moment, with a massive influx of top talent suddenly available. After years of skills shortages, now could be the time to find the missing pieces on your team. It can also be a defensive measure—new hires could be key to helping you navigate the crisis.
Here’s another reason for optimism: the switch to remote work means you can broaden your search wider than ever before. If your business, like many out there, has adapted to working from home quicker than you ever thought possible, you’re now in a position where you can hire staff without being limited to those within commuting range of the office. It’s time to target high quality applicants, wherever they are.
With the tough economy, a lot of firms will scale back recruiting. This leaves those who can afford to hire an amazing opportunity to attract those who until recently seemed out of reach. Even if your hiring budget is limited, there’s never been a better time to be selective. Now’s the time to cast your net as wide as possible and then use technology to narrow in on the very best applicants out there.
Paycor Recruiting was built by recruitment professionals, who understand what an Applicant Tracking System needs. To learn more about how we can help you streamline and optimize you recruiting process, take a tour of our products.
 Previous:
Next:
Stay up to date with the latest HR trends

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Employee satisfaction surveys are a great way to stay in tune with what your employees are thinking. Get real insights on how to engage and motivate your team.

        Article      
Read Time: 10 min
Employee burnout can impact work quality and morale. Discover the warning signs for burnout and how to prevent it in your workplace.

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Being an effective leader requires more than just technical knowledge. Create an environment where everyone can thrive and understand emotions in oneself and others.
HCM Software
HR + Payroll Software
Talent Management
Workforce Management
Employee Experience
Benefits Administration
Quick Links
Services + Support
855-565-3285
Talk to Sales
855-752-8564
© 2023 Paycor, Inc  |  Refer Paycor  |  Privacy Policy  |  1-800-501-9462 |
*Represents approximately 30,000 corporate clients covering 40,000 businesses employing people