The Roadblock in Onboarding New Employees

Onboarding new employees can be efficient and streamlined. Find out the ONE THING that can impede the process.

Employee Experience
Last Updated:  April 12, 2018 | Read Time: 4 min
The number #1 thing that organizations get wrong about onboarding is that human resources and frontline managers can get bogged down with administrative tasks that take them away from focusing on the more important matters. Sixty percent of 1,030 human resources and non-HR U.S. business leaders said that HR spends more time performing administrative and maintenance tasks than strategic tasks.
Onboarding can quickly and easily become nothing more than managing administrative details that, while important, are not the kinds of things that make employees stay and be productive.
For example, if you’re not automating onboarding with software, this can happen to the new hire as well as HR:
Bottom line, managers and HR shouldn’t get caught up in the administrative details. As much as possible, everything with new hire onboarding that can be automated should be automated so everyone can focus on the crucial, important business at hand instead of tasks. Ideally, new team members can enjoy their new hire experience by having paperwork and necessary training completed before their official start date.

Solution: Kiss paper onboarding good-bye. HR administrators don’t have the time, or enough filing cabinets, to keep up with new hire paperwork. Investing in an onboarding software tool to keep track of which documents are complete is key. Look for a tool that:
Solution: Empower employees from day-one to easily find answers to their own questions. Make sure your new employee onboarding platform:
Solution: Don’t wait until their first day to build a solid employee engagement foundation. Ensure your onboarding system follows best practices and engages employees early – before their first day – with company information, handbooks and other policies to help them feel prepared and engaged right away.
Solution: A single, integrated single system of record. No one has time to enter new hire information into multiple databases. That’s an inefficient and error-prone process. Make sure your onboarding solution is:
Paycor’s Onboarding software allows employers to connect with new hires before they join the organization, increasing their engagement and impacting your bottom line. Because our Onboarding tool is electronic, it removes the administrative burden from employers who spend the majority of their time tracking down and organizing paperwork and then manually entering new hire information into payroll. Administrators can get a head start on the new hire process by enabling new employees to complete personal, contact, tax and banking information prior to their start date. Important documents like company handbooks, non-compete clauses and other policies can be reviewed an acknowledge before the employee steps foot in your facility, allowing you to focus more on training and learning and less on filling out forms.
Check out this short two-minute video on Paycor’s Onboarding to learn how you can improve efficiency and engagement at your organization.
 Previous:
Next:
Stay up to date with the latest HR trends

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Employee satisfaction surveys are a great way to stay in tune with what your employees are thinking. Get real insights on how to engage and motivate your team.

        Article      
Read Time: 10 min
Employee burnout can impact work quality and morale. Discover the warning signs for burnout and how to prevent it in your workplace.

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Being an effective leader requires more than just technical knowledge. Create an environment where everyone can thrive and understand emotions in oneself and others.
HCM Software
HR + Payroll Software
Talent Management
Workforce Management
Employee Experience
Benefits Administration
Quick Links
Services + Support
855-565-3285
Talk to Sales
855-752-8564
© 2023 Paycor, Inc  |  Refer Paycor  |  Privacy Policy  |  1-800-501-9462 |
*Represents approximately 30,000 corporate clients covering 40,000 businesses employing people