What Is the True Cost of Hiring Someone?

What is the true cost of hiring? How much is each of your employees actually worth? Paycor shows you how to calculate the cost of employees.

Workforce Management
Last Updated:  April 4, 2016 | Read Time: 4 min
Do you ever wonder how much it actually costs to hire someone? Have you
tried to calculate the value of one of your employees? It’s not an easy
feat. Good news for employers: we have an answer. It’s going to require
research and math, but it’s a worthwhile process that can help you
uncover the hidden costs of running your business.
Who better to answer this question than a team of HR professionals who
know all the ins and outs of hiring? Let’s see what the experts at HR
Support Center’s HR On-Demand would recommend for figuring out the true
cost of hiring an employee.
Question:
We would like to calculate the actual cost of employing someone to help
us with cost analysis, bidding jobs, and pro forma financial statements.
How should we do this?
Answer from the HR Pros:
Determining the “true cost” of an employee is more complex than most
people realize. First, you need to determine the cost for each of the
items below. Then, to calculate the actual cost of an employee, you add
up the annual amount of each of these items.
* The employee’s annual base wage.
* State Unemployment Tax Contributions (SUTA) – Your company’s rate
will depend upon its experience rating with unemployment claims and its
length of time in existence. In most states, there is a wage base cap on
your rates. If you do not know your rate, your payroll representative
can generally provide it to you.
* Federal Unemployment Tax Contributions (FUTA) – This ranges from
$42/year to $420/year for each employee. Where you fall depends on the
credit the federal government allows you to take for your SUTA payments.
* Social Security Match/Medicare Match – This is generally 7.65% of
the employee’s annual wages.
* Workers’ Compensation Premiums – This is a percentage of the
employee’s annual salary. The rate varies based on the employee’s job
duties and the employer’s experience rating with claims. Your workers’
compensation carrier can tell you how much you pay for each employee.
* Health, Dental, Vision, Disability, Life Insurance Contributions
– Include the amount the company contributes towards each of these
benefits.
* Retirement Plan Contributions – Include the amount the company
contributes annually to the employee’s 401(k) plan.
* Bonuses, profit sharing, stock options, and similar benefits you
may offer.
Depending on the level of employer contribution to benefits, you will
most likely find that the true cost of an employee is somewhere between
120% and 140% of their gross base wages. If you want to estimate the
true cost of all of your employees, we recommend performing this
calculation for a few employees and then coming up with an average
percentage to use across the board.
Note that the same calculation would be useful in determining the cost
of retaining employees. You may also want to factor in the costs of
running a training and/or HR department.
This content came from a team of HR professionals at HR Support Center
and HR On-Demand. Businesses like yours can pay a yearly fee for this
service and receive awesome subscription perks like these:
* Legal advice
* Employee handbook help (creating a new one or updating an existing
one)
* Custom HR forms, letters, tools, and other documents
* Tons of Q&A
* News on government activity that could affect you
* Training on common HR activities like hiring
* Thought leadership articles
The list goes on. HR Support Center is not only feature rich, it’s
inexpensive: one entire year of
HR
Support Center is cheaper than one hour of a typical attorney’s
time.
Contact
us today to sign up.

Enter your email below to receive a weekly recap of the latest articles
from Paycor’s Resource Center.


MktoForms2.loadForm("//app-ab01.marketo.com", "003-JWW-697", 1796);
Check your inbox
for an email confirming your subscription. Enjoy!
 Previous:
Next:
Stay up to date with the latest HR trends

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Employee satisfaction surveys are a great way to stay in tune with what your employees are thinking. Get real insights on how to engage and motivate your team.

        Article      
Read Time: 10 min
Employee burnout can impact work quality and morale. Discover the warning signs for burnout and how to prevent it in your workplace.

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Being an effective leader requires more than just technical knowledge. Create an environment where everyone can thrive and understand emotions in oneself and others.
HCM Software
HR + Payroll Software
Talent Management
Workforce Management
Employee Experience
Benefits Administration
Quick Links
Services + Support
855-565-3285
Talk to Sales
855-752-8564
© 2023 Paycor, Inc  |  Refer Paycor  |  Privacy Policy  |  1-800-501-9462 |
*Represents approximately 30,000 corporate clients covering 40,000 businesses employing people