Recruiting Compliance in 2023: What You Need to Know

HR professionals need to be experts on recruiting compliance and avoid falling foul of changing regulations. Stay compliant with EEOC and OFCCP requirements.

Talent Management
Last Updated: January 13, 2022 | Read Time: 10 min
Recruiting is much different than it used to be. For starters, more companies are using remote hiring and virtual interviews than ever before and according to experts, it’s here to stay. Some challenges never change, though. HR professionals still need to be experts on recruiting compliance and avoid falling foul of changing regulations as well as the agencies that oversee recruitment.
When it comes to recruiting compliance, there are five key areas employers need to be aware of and two agencies to get to know:
The Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC) and Office of Federal Contract Compliance Programs (OFCCP) requirements are put in place to ensure that companies’ hiring practices do not discriminate against certain protected classes of applicants. If recruiters fail to abide by these regulations, your company can be in big trouble, facing lawsuits, large fines, and often irreparable damage to your brand.
Another area of compliance on recruiters’ checklists relates to salaries. To date, 30 states have enacted laws either banning recruiters from asking applicants for salary histories and/or requiring companies to pay employees equally regardless of gender. It’s important to review your recruiting practices and implement training to ensure recruiters understand and don’t violate these new laws.
Employers employing women leaders should be especially mindful of compliance. In March 2022, the U.S. Government Accountability Office (GAO) released a study and found that in 2019, full-time managers across industries were most likely to have pay discrepancies. Women earned an average of 71 cents for every dollar a man earns. The pay gap was actually wider for older women and minority women in management.
Additionally, California employers with more than 100 employees must report pay and hours-worked data by establishment, job category, sex, race, and ethnicity to the Department of Fair Employment and Housing (DFEH) annually.
The U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC) enforces federal laws outlawing the discrimination of job applicants and/or employees because of the person’s race, color, religion, sex (including pregnancy, transgender status, and sexual orientation), national origin, age (40 or older), disability or genetic information.
Privately-owned companies, state agencies and labor unions with 15 or more employees who have worked in that capacity for a minimum of 20 calendar weeks are required to comply with EEOC regulations. In FY 2021, 61,331 discrimination charges were filed with the EEOC, and they secured over $484 million for victims of employment discrimination in private sector and state and local government workplaces.
All federal contractors who conduct business with the government in excess of $10,000, fall under the jurisdiction of the OFCCP and, as such, cannot discriminate against employees based on their race, color, religion, sex and national origin. The law also enforces affirmative action and mandates contractors to make efforts to employ qualified individuals with disabilities, Vietnam-era veterans and other covered veterans.
According to the OFCCP’s enforcement statistics, four frequently cited violations related to recruiters were found during compliance reviews:
The Department of Labor provides an official OFCCP compliance checklist on its website.
To date, more than 35 states and 100+ cities and counties nationwide have adopted official efforts to “ban the box” or eliminate questions regarding convictions and arrest records so that employers consider a job candidate’s qualifications first. While ban-the-box laws primarily effect the private sector, a December 2021 law now prohibits most federal agencies and contractors from requesting information about arrest and conviction records from a job applicant prior to a job offer.
Now that marijuana is legal for medical and/or recreational use in many states, the laws related to pre-employment drug screening have also changed. These laws also vary by state. Be sure to know how the laws impact candidates and new hires in the states where your employees work and live prior to the recruiting process.
Discrimination during the recruiting process is typically not intentional; it’s often due to lack of training or sloppy policies. Inadvertent industry stereotypes can be a challenge however. For example, highly qualified women often have a difficult time getting hired in fields such as engineering or construction.
As the number of violations and lawsuits continue to rise, it’s critical that employers educate recruiters on proper interview procedures. Plus, employers should conduct an audit of all job descriptions and requirements to remove possible biases. Doing so will help you meet recruiting compliance requirements down the road.
Paycor can help you navigate the ever-growing maze of recruiting laws and regulations. Our unique software solution was designed by recruiting experts who understand your needs. We built the Paycor Recruiting system to actually think and behave like a recruiter. Our system will help you create online career and application pages so you can find the best candidates available. You’ll be able to efficiently sort and track applications throughout the hiring process and communicate quickly with your leading candidates. You’ll also get valuable analytics and compliance reporting to make sure you’re staying in line with EEO/OFCCP regulations.
 Previous:
Next:
Stay up to date with the latest HR trends

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Employee satisfaction surveys are a great way to stay in tune with what your employees are thinking. Get real insights on how to engage and motivate your team.

        Article      
Read Time: 10 min
Employee burnout can impact work quality and morale. Discover the warning signs for burnout and how to prevent it in your workplace.

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Being an effective leader requires more than just technical knowledge. Create an environment where everyone can thrive and understand emotions in oneself and others.
HCM Software
HR + Payroll Software
Talent Management
Workforce Management
Employee Experience
Benefits Administration
Quick Links
Services + Support
855-565-3285
Talk to Sales
855-752-8564
© 2023 Paycor, Inc  |  Refer Paycor  |  Privacy Policy  |  1-800-501-9462 |
*Represents approximately 30,000 corporate clients covering 40,000 businesses employing people