How To Rehire Furloughed Employees (with Template)

Asking furloughed employees to return to work should follow proper procedure. See how to manage it properly, and get a free template here.

Talent Management
Last Updated:  June 5, 2020 | Read Time: 6 min
Furloughed employees agree to take an unpaid leave of absence in an effort to help their organizations cut costs temporarily. From the employer’s point of view, this helps them survive an unprecedented economic downturn but still retain the talent their business needs to come back, hopefully better and stronger than ever. As you know, employers across America have been forced to furlough employees.
The May jobs report gave us the first signs that the economy is coming back to life, with companies bringing their employees back to work (though not necessarily together in a physical office space.) Although, regrettably, not all jobs will return, the signs are hopeful that more and more employees will soon be back at work.
If you’re considering ending a furlough, here’s what you need to know.
First of all, asking furloughed employees to return to work is cause for celebration, but don’t let that get in the way of following proper procedure. Just as you confirmed an employee’s furlough with an official letter, you should also send a furlough recall letter to all returning employees.
Returning employees are likely to have a lot of questions. As well as stating all the necessary facts, take this opportunity to reassure them about what’s changed (and what hasn’t) when it comes to their place in the organization, their salary and benefits packages, and how you will be ensuring workplace safety.
In the rush to get back in business, you can’t afford to risk miscommunication or compliance headaches. To help SMBs leaders, Paycor an HCM software solution provider, has created a sample Furlough Recall Letter to send to your employees.
Once downloaded, you can edit the document as required.
Javascript is required to interact with this content.
 Previous:
Next:
Stay up to date with the latest HR trends
HCM Software
HR + Payroll Software
Talent Management
Workforce Management
Employee Experience
Benefits Administration
Quick Links
Services + Support
855-565-3285
Talk to Sales
855-752-8564
© 2023 Paycor, Inc  |  Refer Paycor  |  Privacy Policy  |  1-800-501-9462 |
*Represents approximately 30,000 corporate clients covering 40,000 businesses employing people