The Problem of Employee Tardiness and How Staff Scheduling Software Can Help

Employee tardiness is a major problem that costs businesses a lot of money every single year. Here are some actionable tips for reducing tardiness and absenteeism in the workplace.

Employee Experience
Last Updated: January 9, 2020 | Read Time: 7 min
When a valued employee walks in five minutes late for their shift, blaming traffic congestion, it can seem the definition of a small problem. What’s a few minutes against years of good service? Employee lateness isn’t a problem – until it becomes repeated lateness. However, almost a fifth of American workers are late for work at least once a week, according to YouGov polling. Over the course of a year, a little lateness adds up. Employee tardiness at work cost US businesses more than $3 billion annually, according to SHRM, and that was back in 2005.
Chronic tardiness in the workplace causes other problems, too. If one associate is repeatedly late, and nothing is done about it, colleagues may question why they need to be on time. However, if you take immediate action, it can seem like an overreaction. This leaves managers in a bind – something must be done, but what? The first step is understanding the problem.
There are lots of good reasons that an employee may be late for work. YouGov polling suggests that the vast majority of tardiness is blamed on either traffic, childcare or bad weather (all totally understandable reasons).
However, when employees repeatedly show up late, particularly after previously being punctual, it’s normal for a manager to be worried. It’s important to determine whether these incidents are genuine one-offs, whether they show a lack of care and responsibility, or whether they are indicative of a deeper problem. Lateness can be the first sign of decreased engagement, burnout or an indication that an employee is struggling to balance work and family commitments.
Managers must establish whether the correct response to increased tardiness is support, discipline, or a boost to employee engagement. However, first, a responsible employer must ask whether they are doing everything possible to enable punctuality among their staff.
Earlier access to schedules offer staff more time to plan their lives around work commitments, more time to arrange childcare, and generally leave them feeling more in control of their lives. In short, they make tardiness less likely.
When it comes to rearranging a shift, information bottlenecks – whereby a manager, and only the manager, knows the needs and availability of all staff – prevent a swift resolution. However, with our app a shift swap can be requested, seen by all qualified team members and accepted in a matter of moments. Likewise, if an employee is concerned that they may not be able to make the start, part, or end of a shift, they can easily arrange for cover from a colleague.
Employee tardiness isn’t good for business – that much is clear. But before you race ahead with disciplinary measures – or, better, checking with an employee to make sure they are OK – it’s essential to consider whether your staff scheduling process is making it harder for staff to manage their time, and therefore their timekeeping. Staff scheduling software doesn’t just make managers’ lives easier, it ensures that staff are informed, engaged and on time.
 Previous:
Next:
Stay up to date with the latest HR trends

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Employee satisfaction surveys are a great way to stay in tune with what your employees are thinking. Get real insights on how to engage and motivate your team.

        Article      
Read Time: 10 min
Employee burnout can impact work quality and morale. Discover the warning signs for burnout and how to prevent it in your workplace.

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Being an effective leader requires more than just technical knowledge. Create an environment where everyone can thrive and understand emotions in oneself and others.
HCM Software
HR + Payroll Software
Talent Management
Workforce Management
Employee Experience
Benefits Administration
Quick Links
Services + Support
855-565-3285
Talk to Sales
855-752-8564
© 2023 Paycor, Inc  |  Refer Paycor  |  Privacy Policy  |  1-800-501-9462 |
*Represents approximately 30,000 corporate clients covering 40,000 businesses employing people