Tips to Reduce Turnover and Increase Retention Rates in Restaurants

When it comes to turnover rates, few industries are hit harder than restaurants. Get the tips you need to curb the turnover epidemic.

Talent Management
Last Updated:  September 7, 2018 | Read Time: 6 min
When it comes to turnover rates, few industries are hit harder than restaurants. A 2017 study from the Bureau of Labor found that the hospitality turnover rate eclipsed 70% for the second consecutive year. And if you just focus on the fast food industry, you’ll find turnover rates hovering near 150%. With large numbers of seasonal and teenage workers, plus employees looking for a stop gap between jobs, restaurants face a constant struggle to find and retain quality talent due to the transient nature of the industry. But for many restaurants, disengaged workers and a poor culture lead to high turnover. What can you do to create a better work environment, improve job satisfaction and prevent good employees from leaving? Here are four tips to consider:
What’s one of the top reasons any employee chooses to leave a role? Compensation, job mismatch and excessive workload certainly play a factor, but a primary cause of employee turnover stems from manager dissatisfaction. That’s why finding the right leader and investing in their development is critical to your restaurant’s overall success. When employees have confidence in and respect the person they work for, they’re performance and attitude shows. In fact, Gallup found that employees who are supervised by highly engaged managers are 59% more likely to be actively engaged than employees supervised by disengaged managers.
Searching for just any manager isn’t enough. Be sure to identify the exact responsibilities of the role so you can streamline the interview process and find the best fit based on the individual’s previous work experience. Plus, level-setting proper expectations prior to hiring a manager will make the onboarding process and transition into a new role seamless.
Investing in continuous development and training opportunities throughout their career is a great way to motivate and engage any manager. It’s also provides managers with an opportunity to learn and develop new skills and gain outside knowledge that they can bring back to your establishment.
Before you begin your search, take a hard look at your staff. Current employees understand your systems, operations, expectations and your customer base. And if a candidate has a great relationship with and is respected by the current staff, the transition may be easier than bringing in an outsider.
Employees that fail to receive proper training can quickly become disengaged due to a lack of support. That’s why onboarding and continuous training should be mandatory for all employees. Developing a formal onboarding process that ensures new team members have everything they need to be successful from day one, understand their role and responsibilities and are provided a detailed overview of policies and procedures. At Paycor, we’ve created a restaurant-specific Onboarding Checklist that you can use to create a productive new hire experience and help reduce turnover. Check it out here.
How often do you take the time to listen to your employees’ feedback? When was the last time you asked your staff about their role, their goals or their concerns? If you’re not offering your staff an open line of communication, you’re missing out on an opportunity to connect with them on what’s working and where improvements can be made. The more engaged and appreciated your staff feels, the better service they’ll provide your customers. But when they’re disengaged and unhappy, your customers will notice, and one poor experience could discourage them from visiting your location again.
Restaurant employees feel valued when you listen to their needs, but maybe the most meaningful thing you can do in their eyes is to recognize and reward them. Celebrating achievements at staff meetings, creating an employee of the month program or even incentivizing staff with gift cards based on performance are extra ways to build up your people and show you care. Maintaining a positive culture and work environment is a top challenge for many restaurants, so the more you can do to show employees that their work is meaningful and their contributions are appreciated, the more likely you are to retain them.
Reducing turnover will always be an uphill battle for restaurants. But with the average cost to replace an employee nearly $3,500, the more you can do to focus on retaining your people, the more your bottom line will benefit.
For nearly 30 years, Paycor has partnered with the restaurant community to solve their HR and payroll challenges. From new hire onboarding and employee self-service to complex tax filing and learning management, our intuitive technology backed by industry expertise has given restaurants the peace of mind to focus more on creating a memorable experience for customers. If you’re looking to streamline your processes and break free from administrative work, contact our dedicated team of restaurant consultants to learn how we can help.
 Previous:
Next:
Stay up to date with the latest HR trends

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Employee satisfaction surveys are a great way to stay in tune with what your employees are thinking. Get real insights on how to engage and motivate your team.

        Article      
Read Time: 10 min
Employee burnout can impact work quality and morale. Discover the warning signs for burnout and how to prevent it in your workplace.

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Being an effective leader requires more than just technical knowledge. Create an environment where everyone can thrive and understand emotions in oneself and others.
HCM Software
HR + Payroll Software
Talent Management
Workforce Management
Employee Experience
Benefits Administration
Quick Links
Services + Support
855-565-3285
Talk to Sales
855-752-8564
© 2023 Paycor, Inc  |  Refer Paycor  |  Privacy Policy  |  1-800-501-9462 |
*Represents approximately 30,000 corporate clients covering 40,000 businesses employing people