Championing Women in the Workplace

Women who experienced belittling at work are now stepping up to fight microaggressions. Address the varying challenges of women and together be a champion for business growth.

Employee Experience
Last Updated: February 17, 2023 | Read Time: 12 min
Last year, women leaders left their companies at the highest rate in years (McKinsey). Many are aware that the pandemic forced a shift; but according to a 2022 report, women are also leaving to take advantage of more certain career opportunities.
This trend leaves us with a few questions: Have businesses taken note about what not to do? Are companies making an active shift to stop the talent drain? Are women finding that the grass is actually greener on the other side? Is all of the career shifting forcing companies into gender equality? And how do their male counterparts fit into this equation?
Let’s take a closer look at why women are company-hopping and how companies can use that understanding to champion female growth in their workspace.
Women everywhere are making moves to companies that offer a more inclusive workplace. (Note: It is not about just being passed over for a promotion.) Here are a few key reasons why women are leaving.
Acknowledging ‘the challenges women face in the workplace’ is a good start but a broad statement. There are so many factors that go into an individual’s work experience at a high level, but business leaders must get granular. Here are a few ways leaders can help.
The ascension of women in the workplace is not an issue for women alone to face. They need c-suite allies who can look past gender and consider the individuality and distinct skillsets of their employees. To be slightly cliched, leaders need to not just talk the talk but walk the walk.
We set revenue goals for the year and view targets on the latest video we upload to social channels. When we really want to achieve something we set a goal and then do everything we can to reach it. Diversity shouldn’t be any different.
Diversity goals do two things:
The key word here would be ‘visibility.’ For years men have had work role-models—other men in leadership roles who they see daily. This shows them that they could be in that position someday and it shows a path for achieving that goal.
Women do not have the same visibility and not having female role models in a leadership position can cause them to question whether their career aspirations are viable in the current role.
At some companies, this type of change will come quickly. In other places it’s going to be what’s known as “an uphill battle.” In all cases what will help will be a broader top-down diversity initiative. This could include education and awareness activities (for example, how many of your employees engage in microaggressions without being consciously aware of their harmful effects). It could also be cultural awareness celebrations and speakers. What’s important is that these initiatives are tailored to the specific culture (and needs) of the company.
Championing women at work is about more than passing out promotions. It’s about valuing their contribution from the start of their employment and ensuring that they have an equal spot on the corporate playing field. These six tips will put you on the path to doing just that.
Having a keen understanding of gender equality in the workplace will enable you to address the varying challenges of women in the workplace. This is an important tool for business growth. Champion women in the workplace by challenging what’s become a normalized inequality at work. Doing so will make you an advocate for empowerment. Are you ready to Be an Agent of Change?
 Previous:
Next:
Stay up to date with the latest HR trends

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Employee satisfaction surveys are a great way to stay in tune with what your employees are thinking. Get real insights on how to engage and motivate your team.

        Article      
Read Time: 10 min
Employee burnout can impact work quality and morale. Discover the warning signs for burnout and how to prevent it in your workplace.

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Being an effective leader requires more than just technical knowledge. Create an environment where everyone can thrive and understand emotions in oneself and others.
HCM Software
HR + Payroll Software
Talent Management
Workforce Management
Employee Experience
Benefits Administration
Quick Links
Services + Support
855-565-3285
Talk to Sales
855-752-8564
© 2023 Paycor, Inc  |  Refer Paycor  |  Privacy Policy  |  1-800-501-9462 |
*Represents approximately 30,000 corporate clients covering 40,000 businesses employing people