How to Help Employees Understand Their Total Compensation

Employers are curious about what will make employees stay at the company. One way to show how much they're valued is with a total compensation statement.

Employee Experience
Last Updated: August 19, 2022 | Read Time: 6 min
With an estimated 37.4 million people expected to quit their jobs this year according to Gartner, it’s no wonder that turnover tops the list of concerns for business owners.
Naturally, many employers are curious about what will make employees stay. Some job jumpers want a higher salary, others want work-from-home flexibility and better benefits. But before the list of creative solutions grows any longer it’s also important for companies to take inventory of what is already being offered in addition to salary. One way to show employees how much they are valued in your organization is with a total compensation statement.
Total compensation is the full monetary amount that comprises salary, all benefits (insurance, time off, retirement, profit sharing) and any other incentives a company offers an employee in return for their services. A total compensation statement provides employees with a full breakdown of all salary, benefits and rewards.Total compensation statements are only recently gaining in popularity. 42% of employers reported using total compensation statements according to a recent Payscale report. The hope is that the information will help to increase morale and engagement by offering transparency about all of the investments companies make for employees.
Employees are more likely to have high engagement if they feel appreciated by their employer. A major component of the appreciation factor is total compensation, including salary, bonuses, health insurance, 401(k) matching and other benefits. According to employee engagement expert Leigh Branham, “There is no more emotionally charged issue for employees than what they are paid for their contributions. 
What we make doesn’t just pay the bills — it measures our worth in the most material way.” This is why inadequate compensation drives employees away. It’s not necessarily because they can make more money working at another company, but because they feel devalued and unrecognized.
Put simply, a total compensation statement is a report that displays a graphical compensation breakdown per employee for their wages, benefits, and taxes. This includes but is not limited to:
Pay
Benefits
Whether or not you plan to increase employee pay or add benefits in the near future, communication is still critically important. Here are a few best practices for discussing compensation and providing a total compensation statement.
An employee who is not completely satisfied with his or her current paycheck might be surprised to see the total investment you are making.
Paycor’s Compensation Planning product allows you to see total compensation for each employee, including wages, benefits and taxes. The easy-to-read format makes it perfect for sharing in the context of an open conversation with each employee about his or her compensation package.When employees understand you value them, they are more likely to go the extra mile for you. Being transparent about the investment you have made in their total compensation is an easy way to show your appreciation for their dedication and hard work. Contact us to learn more about Paycor’s Compensation Planning and Reporting and Analytics Tools and start reaping the bottom-line benefits of higher engagement and retention.
 Previous:
Next:
Stay up to date with the latest HR trends

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Employee satisfaction surveys are a great way to stay in tune with what your employees are thinking. Get real insights on how to engage and motivate your team.

        Article      
Read Time: 10 min
Employee burnout can impact work quality and morale. Discover the warning signs for burnout and how to prevent it in your workplace.

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Being an effective leader requires more than just technical knowledge. Create an environment where everyone can thrive and understand emotions in oneself and others.
HCM Software
HR + Payroll Software
Talent Management
Workforce Management
Employee Experience
Benefits Administration
Quick Links
Services + Support
855-565-3285
Talk to Sales
855-752-8564
© 2023 Paycor, Inc  |  Refer Paycor  |  Privacy Policy  |  1-800-501-9462 |
*Represents approximately 30,000 corporate clients covering 40,000 businesses employing people