Recruiting Resources Toolkit - Hiring Tools

Hiring is hard enough. This is especially true if you don’t have the right recruiting tools and templates in place. Check out our Ultimate Hiring Toolkit and get everything you need to start hiring better today!

Talent Management
Last Updated: March 25, 2020 | Read Time: 8 min
Hiring is hard enough. This is especially true if you don’t have the right recruiting tools and templates in place. To help make things easier, we created the toolkits below to help you standardize and templatize a few key pieces of your recruiting process. Use these free HR templates and recruiting resources below to prepare your team for successful hiring and ensure you’re up to speed with best practices for effective recruiting.
If you’ve found your way to this page, chances are that you’re looking for a way to make your day to day recruiting a little easier. Recruiting is difficult for many reasons. One of the biggest is that there are so many people and pieces in the hiring process to manage:
Beyond this, you also need to drive and facilitate communication across many channels:
To manage all of this, you can’t just “wing it” and expect to succeed. You need a structured approach and framework that drives your candidates through the three fundamental stages of recruiting:
Streamline and optimize your recruiting process starting with these free templates.
When a new job opens, before anything else, you need a crystal clear idea of your ideal candidate profile. Getting this information from your hiring managers needs to be standardized so that you can easily get the information you need every time. This is where the Hiring Manager Intake Form comes in. Every time you receive a new job requisition, work through this template with your hiring manager so that the following is always well defined:
Benefits of the Hiring Manager Intake Form:
Your job postings and descriptions often serve as the first impression between you and your candidates. As we all know, first impressions count. You only have a few seconds to capture a job seeker’s attention, and your job description is often the make or break point that decides whether or not a candidate decides to apply for your job. To make sure you are making a good first impression with candidates, download our free job description template below. Feel free to edit and use it as you see fit for your organization! (And also, check out our expert advice on eliminating gender discrimination in job descriptions.)
The vast majority of candidates agree that interviews are extremely important and that the quality of the experience can change their minds, one way or the other, about the job and the company. To help HR and SMB leaders fine tune their interview process, download our guide in which we cover key topics such as what makes an ideal interviewer, what makes a successful interview and ideas on what kinds of questions to ask during an interview.
The best-case scenario for recruiters and hiring teams is to get to the end of the interview stage and have more than one highly qualified candidate. If you’re lucky enough to be in this position, your team will need a strategy for evaluating the candidates who made it to the final round. This of course is a critical moment in the hiring process, because now it’s decision time, and decisions are notoriously vulnerable to subjective impressions or just everyday miscommunication. To avoid common mistakes and perfect your post-interview evaluations, read our article on evaluating candidates.
Soon after you make a verbal offer to a candidate, you’ll want to follow up with a formal offer letter. No worries—we’ve got you covered. There are 5 components of an offer letter: the formal offer, topline description of the job, total comp, terms and conditions, and finally a way for the candidate to formally accept the offer. Learn more about how to write an effective offer letter and feel free to download our free template.
Great, you’ve found your dream candidate and they’ve formally accepted the job. But your job’s not done—don’t forget onboarding!
Onboarding plays a critical role in the success of new hires. Studies show that more than half of new employees who decide to leave within the first year of employment blame lack of training and a failure to feel a sense of belonging or basic comfort with their position. Our Onboarding toolkit is one of our most popular because it includes everything you need to know and prepare prior to your new employee’s first day. Download our free toolkit to learn how to avoid the most common onboarding problems and how to prepare for the first 90 days and beyond. (For a just-the-facts approach to onboarding, you might also want to take a look at our onboarding checklist.)
Finding, interviewing and hiring talented people are the most important challenges growing businesses face. Paycor Recruiting is a software solution designed and built by recruiters for recruiters and HR hiring teams to help you solve your hiring problems and optimize your recruiting process.
 Previous:
Next:
Stay up to date with the latest HR trends

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Employee satisfaction surveys are a great way to stay in tune with what your employees are thinking. Get real insights on how to engage and motivate your team.

        Article      
Read Time: 10 min
Employee burnout can impact work quality and morale. Discover the warning signs for burnout and how to prevent it in your workplace.

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Being an effective leader requires more than just technical knowledge. Create an environment where everyone can thrive and understand emotions in oneself and others.
HCM Software
HR + Payroll Software
Talent Management
Workforce Management
Employee Experience
Benefits Administration
Quick Links
Services + Support
855-565-3285
Talk to Sales
855-752-8564
© 2023 Paycor, Inc  |  Refer Paycor  |  Privacy Policy  |  1-800-501-9462 |
*Represents approximately 30,000 corporate clients covering 40,000 businesses employing people