Hiring Software: What You Need To Know

Take control and streamline your recruiting process with hiring software. Utilize the hiring technology to streamline the process and stay compliant!

Talent Management
Last Updated:  May 8, 2018 | Read Time: 6 min
Hiring software systems exist to simplify recruitment at every stage in the process, especially tostreamline tasks, improve efficiency and minimize the chances of mistakes along the way.
Taking control and organizing the process of hiring promotes efficiency and collaboration. Recruiting software manages all the pieces of data collected, makes it easy to access and converts it into valuable data. With the data in hand, companies can identify where holes exist and evaluate problem areas in need of immediate improvement.
Companies that recruit successfully are consistently meeting or exceeding hiring expectations and working efficiently to achieve human resource goals. Organizations that constantly have recruiting challenges aren’t always aware what it is they’re doing wrong. The beauty of incorporating the right software application is that it’s designed to find and remove roadblocks. Here are some examples why many businesses invest a solution to streamline and organize their entire recruiting and hiring process:
More often than you think the application experience is turning qualified applicants off and impacting the quality of your candidates.
Imagine this: You’ve posted your opening on a highly visible job board and are starting to get submissions. Unfortunately, the rudimentary process you’re using to collect applications requires job-seekers to fill in resume information online, download a file, fill it out (usually with some of the same information they just entered online), scan the completed document, upload it along with a separate cover letter, find the upload option on your site and, if all goes as planned, include all requested attachments. Whew!
Applying for a job should not be a job. Employees will work hard once they get hired, but until then, they shouldn’t have to battle a confusing process just to be considered.
Recruiters have their hands full and with all the details they’re juggling, it’s challenging to maintain a consistent and organized workflow. In some cases that means overlooking communication that’s important to applicants. Recruiters are so busy focusing on the group of applicants moving forward, they neglect acknowledging those who spent their time applying, notifying them that their materials have been received or letting them know they won’t be advancing in the process. Sure, they may not be right for this position, but how likely is it that those applicants will apply again? This is also true for those potential employees in Scenario 1 who now rule out positions at your company because the application process is unnecessarily burdensome.
Mobile phones have changed quite a bit since we marveled at the futuristic technology introduced onscreen in the 1987 movie Wall Street. Those clunky things have evolved into Smartphones, and their use and our dependence on them is only growing.
It’s obvious how connected we are with our trusty phones providing instant access to the digital world. But how we use our phones is changing. According to a study by the Pew Research Center, 50% of mobile phone users have used their phone to apply for jobs online, and 23% of users have even used their phone to create a resume or cover letter. Online software that’s accessible from any device can reach more people and expand the applicant pipeline.

Talent acquisition continues to top the list of company priorities and has therefore become an important focus for process improvement.
Work with your team to objectively assess your recruitment process. If your current methods are not allowing you to achieve your hiring goals, an online software solution is worth your consideration. Time is money, and inefficient processes eat up both. Fortunately, there are affordable software solutions designed to serve every size of business, from small offices with only a few employees to the largest enterprises.
If finding and retaining quality employees is a priority for your company, take a closer look at improving your recruiting efforts using technology. Chances are your competitors are already doing so.
Every organization is unique and requires a custom approach to building the right foundation of technology. That’s why we don’t sell off-the-shelf solutions at Paycor. We first take time to learn about and understand you’re your business. So if you’re considering hiring software, let’s talk. Our award-winning Applicant Tracking System built by recruiters can help you find the quality candidates you need to keep up. 
 Previous:
Next:
Stay up to date with the latest HR trends

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Employee satisfaction surveys are a great way to stay in tune with what your employees are thinking. Get real insights on how to engage and motivate your team.

        Article      
Read Time: 10 min
Employee burnout can impact work quality and morale. Discover the warning signs for burnout and how to prevent it in your workplace.

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Being an effective leader requires more than just technical knowledge. Create an environment where everyone can thrive and understand emotions in oneself and others.
HCM Software
HR + Payroll Software
Talent Management
Workforce Management
Employee Experience
Benefits Administration
Quick Links
Services + Support
855-565-3285
Talk to Sales
855-752-8564
© 2023 Paycor, Inc  |  Refer Paycor  |  Privacy Policy  |  1-800-501-9462 |
*Represents approximately 30,000 corporate clients covering 40,000 businesses employing people