Employer Breastfeeding Laws by State

Laws on breastfeeding in the workplace vary by state. Where does your state stand? Click here to find out.

Employee Experience
Last Updated:  November 14, 2019 | Read Time: 17 min
When President Obama made the Affordable Care Act (ACA) the law of the land in 2010, new amendments to the Fair Labor Standards Act (FLSA) addressing breastfeeding in the workplace went into effect. The new guidelines require all employers in every state to provide reasonable break time for non-exempt employees to express breast milk for their nursing child for one year after the child’s birth. Employees who are not entitled to overtime are not covered by this law.
While the federal government laid the foundation, 32 states have built upon the basic law. Some states have clarified whether these breaks are paid or unpaid and some have extended how long breastfeeding mothers are protected by the law. Many state laws do cover exempt workers.
Where does your state stand? Use the chart below to find out.
 
Cal. Labor Code § 1030 et seq. (2001) provides that employers need to allow a break and provide a room for a mother who desires to express milk in private.
 
2013 Hawaii Sess. Laws. Act. 249 requires specified employers to provide reasonable break time for an employee to express milk for a nursing child in a location, other than a bathroom, that is sanitary, shielded from view and free from intrusion. The law also requires employers to post notice of the application of this law in a conspicuous place accessible to employees. (SB 532) Employers with under 20 employees need not provide break time if it would cause an undue hardship.
 
Ill. Rev. Stat. ch. 820 § 260 (2001) creates the Nursing Mothers in the Workplace Act. Requires that employers provide reasonable unpaid break time each day to employees who need to express breast milk. The law also requires employers to make reasonable efforts to provide a room or other location, other than a toilet stall, where an employee can express her milk in privacy. (SB 542) 
Regardless of your state’s laws, you should consider adding a breastfeeding policy to your employee handbook. Not only can it help you remain complaint, but employees will find it useful when they return from maternity leave. Keep in mind, having good practices in place that go above and beyond the law can be a powerful benefit to help you recruit and retain talent.
Our expertise goes far beyond compliance. From recruiting and onboarding to people management, labor costs and more, we provide technology and expertise to help businesses solve problems and grow. How can we help your organization? Take a guided tour of our most popular solutions to find out.
 Previous:
Next:
Stay up to date with the latest HR trends

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Employee satisfaction surveys are a great way to stay in tune with what your employees are thinking. Get real insights on how to engage and motivate your team.

        Article      
Read Time: 10 min
Employee burnout can impact work quality and morale. Discover the warning signs for burnout and how to prevent it in your workplace.

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Being an effective leader requires more than just technical knowledge. Create an environment where everyone can thrive and understand emotions in oneself and others.
HCM Software
HR + Payroll Software
Talent Management
Workforce Management
Employee Experience
Benefits Administration
Quick Links
Services + Support
855-565-3285
Talk to Sales
855-752-8564
© 2023 Paycor, Inc  |  Refer Paycor  |  Privacy Policy  |  1-800-501-9462 |
*Represents approximately 30,000 corporate clients covering 40,000 businesses employing people