Why Employee Turnover is the Single Most Revealing HR Metric

The employee turnover rate is a metric that reveals helpful information about the health of your company. Understand which KPIs feed into the overal metric, here.

Employee Experience
Last Updated:  January 30, 2020 | Read Time: 4 min
Tracking employee turnover is critical in determining the effectiveness of your people management strategies, but it’s broad metric that only tells a piece of the story. You can unlock the power of your turnover data by gaining a deeper understanding of who’s leaving and when. This and other KPIs will enable you to optimize and determine the effectiveness of your engagement and retention initiatives and drive action to improve performance.
Critical Turnover Metrics to Measure
ERE has a handy worksheet that can help you calculate the exact cost of turnover at your company.
The answers to HR’s most pressing business problems—everything from troubleshooting a recruiting pipeline to predicting labor costs, overtime and turnover—are in their company’s HR, payroll, ATS and time systems. Paycor Analytics takes the complexity out of workforce analysis and planning by empowering HR leaders with high-impact, easy-to-consume, real-time data insights at your fingertips. We provide answers to a host of pre-built questions about your workforce and displays trends and predictions, so you can take action by making complex, business-critical decisions every day.
Want to learn more? Click on the button below for a visually engaging experience of how you can make the most of your HR data.
 Previous:
Next:
Stay up to date with the latest HR trends

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Employee satisfaction surveys are a great way to stay in tune with what your employees are thinking. Get real insights on how to engage and motivate your team.

        Article      
Read Time: 10 min
Employee burnout can impact work quality and morale. Discover the warning signs for burnout and how to prevent it in your workplace.

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Being an effective leader requires more than just technical knowledge. Create an environment where everyone can thrive and understand emotions in oneself and others.
HCM Software
HR + Payroll Software
Talent Management
Workforce Management
Employee Experience
Benefits Administration
Quick Links
Services + Support
855-565-3285
Talk to Sales
855-752-8564
© 2023 Paycor, Inc  |  Refer Paycor  |  Privacy Policy  |  1-800-501-9462 |
*Represents approximately 30,000 corporate clients covering 40,000 businesses employing people