5 Tips to Create an Engaging Workplace

Struggling with a culture of disengaged employees? Learn 5 tips to create an engaging workplace.

Employee Experience
Last Updated:  July 6, 2017 | Read Time: 4 min
According to Gallup’s 2017 State of the American Workplace report, 70% of employees are not engaged at work. What was once viewed as a problematic trend is now common amongst many workplaces, and it’s leaving behind numerous negative consequences for employers. Poor employee engagement results in less productivity, less creativity, greater absenteeism and higher turnover.
Fortunately, low engagement isn’t inevitable. Some organizations have great employee engagement because they make developing and retaining employees a top priority. Their employees consciously and consistently work for the good of their organization. They’re committed, innovative and driven to help their coworkers and organization thrive.
You can’t force an employee to be engaged—engagement is ultimately their choice. But, you can create working conditions that inspire and empower employees to make that choice. Your ultimate goal is to create an engaging culture—a workplace culture that prompts and rewards engagement. Here’s how you create it:
Define the specific purpose of your organization
What do you do? What’s your style? How are you different from the competition? Employees can’t be engaged unless they have something to be engaged in. Engagement needs direction, focus. And employees need to know how their role contributes to the organization’s purpose. To get buy-in from employees and to attract top candidates, develop an employee value proposition that defines who you are and the benefits of working for your organization.
Commit to the success of your employees
If you want employees to work for your organization’s success, you must work for theirs. Coach them. Train them. Help them develop their skills and abilities and invest in them. They’ll see that you are committed to their present and future success, and they’ll know that you trust them. And knowing you’re committed to them, they’ll be more committed to you.
Recognize employees who go above and beyond
In a culture of engagement, just getting the job done isn’t enough. Encourage extra effort by rewarding it. Formal recognition programs are a great way to do this. And by recognizing employees for their efforts, you show them that their work is valued and meaningful.
Encourage criticism, feedback, and innovation
Every organization could use improvement and it’s crucial to understand what makes your employees tick. Solicit their ideas. Be open to their suggestions. By giving your employees a say in the organization’s operations and working conditions, you provide them with a sense of ownership. Policies, procedures, and practices shouldn’t all be dictated from the top but should be formed with the help of employee feedback.
Allow for a healthy work-life balance
Candidates are looking for employers that value the entire person by promoting work/life balance and honoring family and personal commitments. They want to work for employers who are willing to offer the flexibility that meets their needs. It can mean completing a 40-hour work week in 4 days or varying arrival and departure times. Though flexible work schedules may not work for every organization, employers would be wise to consider how this benefit could widen the talent pool, impact productivity and improve retention rates.
Need more tips on creating a culture of engagement? Paycor has created expert articles and guides on the importance of employee engagement. Start by checking out more tips from Paycor’s Chief Human Resource Officer Karen Crone. Then, get our free whitepaper “Employee Engagement: Why You Can’t Afford to Get It Wrong.”
Source: Gallup
 Previous:
Next:
Stay up to date with the latest HR trends

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Employee satisfaction surveys are a great way to stay in tune with what your employees are thinking. Get real insights on how to engage and motivate your team.

        Article      
Read Time: 10 min
Employee burnout can impact work quality and morale. Discover the warning signs for burnout and how to prevent it in your workplace.

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Being an effective leader requires more than just technical knowledge. Create an environment where everyone can thrive and understand emotions in oneself and others.
HCM Software
HR + Payroll Software
Talent Management
Workforce Management
Employee Experience
Benefits Administration
Quick Links
Services + Support
855-565-3285
Talk to Sales
855-752-8564
© 2023 Paycor, Inc  |  Refer Paycor  |  Privacy Policy  |  1-800-501-9462 |
*Represents approximately 30,000 corporate clients covering 40,000 businesses employing people