Maternity Leave Policy Template

Offering maternity leave to your employees is a valued benefit. Create your maternity leave policy with ease by using our free template.

Effectively communicate your maternity leave policy with employees
Download Your 
                                   Free Copy 

DOWNLOADS:  410 And Counting...!
Get Our Maternity Leave Template
Celebrating the addition of a baby is an important time for a family. And, as an HR leader you have an important role in reducing stress for new mothers by helping them prepare for their time away from work. New parents have enough to think about! Currently, there is no overarching federal legislation requiring employers to offer paid maternity leave. The Family and Medical Leave Act or FMLA requires employers to grant employees 12 weeks of unpaid leave to eligible employees, but it is only for organizations with more than 50 employees. Recently in 2020, federal government employees were granted up to 12 weeks of paid maternity leave through FMLA, but only 20% of private sector workers have the same. Fortunately, some states have enacted laws that require employers to provide paid parental leave, but everyone else is at the mercy of their company’s maternity leave policy.
A maternity leave policy is a critical part of an organization’s benefits package that gives mothers who have just given birth or adopted a child, guidance on how much time an employer will allow the family to adjust to life after the baby arrives. Some organizations have parental leave policies, paternity leave policies and/or adoption leave policies to accommodate all families’ needs. An established policy will include details on who is eligible for paid maternity leave, how much time can be granted based on laws, and how to make requests.
A maternity leave plan helps your employee and team prepare for a mothers’ temporary leave of absence. It outlines what will be completed prior to the mothers’ departure and who is responsible for tasks while she is out of office.
Certainly, a generous well-crafted maternity leave policy can help ease the transition back to work for new mothers but there are also additional benefits to employers who create a maternity leave policy. If you haven’t already established a policy, here are a few reasons why you should consider it.
A maternity leave policy generally includes the following:
Your organization’s statement: This statement includes rationale for why your organization believes a maternity policy is important. It can be general or incorporate company core values.
Eligibility definition: This is a definition of who is eligible to receive paid maternity leave based on their status (full-time or part-time).
Duration: An explanation of how the duration of paid leave is calculated for employees.
Legal information: An explanation of how the policy coordinates with federal, state and local laws like FMLA and other organizational policies.
Requests: A maternity leave policy will also outline the process for making a request.
Getting started on your own maternity leave policy is easy with our free customizable template. Fill out the form at the top of the page to download it now to begin.
NEXT:
NEXT: