10 Tips for Great Employee Retention

The cost of hiring new employees can be astronomical. It's important to retain your best employees. Start by leveraging these 10 tips!

Employee Experience
Last Updated: September 15, 2022 | Read Time: 9 min
The pandemic was a stress test like no other. It might’ve even been the biggest crisis in the history of HR. We all made unexpected pivots. Businesses invested to make remote work a success, and teams found ways to work together no matter the circumstances. These are building blocks for a strong company culture, the kind that can supercharge future growth, but with one stipulation: Employees have to stick around.
Regardless of the circumstances, HR teams and department managers should always do all they can to manage employees in a way that helps retain their best people. Tenured employees understand what makes your company tick, they know how to get things done and, most importantly of all, they know each other.
And there’s the other side of the coin: The cost of hiring new employees can be astronomical. In fact, The Society for Human Resource Management (SHRM) reported that, on average, a company will spend 6 to 9 months of an employee’s salary on recruiting, hiring, and training a new team member. Of course, employee retention rates vary by industry, but every business is (or should be) intent on keeping their rock stars. If your company is having a tough time keeping employees, here are ten tips we propose for how to retain the ones you’ve got:
In addition to contributing to a positive culture, when you develop employees through a learning management system, you’ll simultaneously build a pool of potential new leaders within the company who are statistically more likely to succeed than leaders brought in from outside the business. By strategically and cost-effectively creating, managing, and delivering personalized training to employees, you can improve employee engagement and retention.
Retention is one of the critical components for creating an effective people management strategy. For more recommendations and inspiration on how to make an even greater impact at your organization, visit our HR Center of Excellence People Management Hub.
Paycor specializes in helping businesses of all sizes retain top talent with HR and learning management solutions. If you’re looking to optimize your performance management programs, improve employee development, or offer structured learning opportunities, talk to a Paycor consultant today.
 Previous:
Next:
Stay up to date with the latest HR trends

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Employee satisfaction surveys are a great way to stay in tune with what your employees are thinking. Get real insights on how to engage and motivate your team.

        Article      
Read Time: 10 min
Employee burnout can impact work quality and morale. Discover the warning signs for burnout and how to prevent it in your workplace.

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Being an effective leader requires more than just technical knowledge. Create an environment where everyone can thrive and understand emotions in oneself and others.
HCM Software
HR + Payroll Software
Talent Management
Workforce Management
Employee Experience
Benefits Administration
Quick Links
Services + Support
855-565-3285
Talk to Sales
855-752-8564
© 2023 Paycor, Inc  |  Refer Paycor  |  Privacy Policy  |  1-800-501-9462 |
*Represents approximately 30,000 corporate clients covering 40,000 businesses employing people