How To Identify And Train New Managers

There are commonalities amongst good managers. Understand traits of good managers and how to identify them.

Employee Experience
Last Updated:  February 8, 2019 | Read Time: 4 min
Being promoted to a managing position is a big deal, but often new managers are unprepared for their new job or unsure how it will be different than their previous position. We asked Paycor’s senior HR business partner, Lauren Ammon, to talk about how to identify employees with managerial potential and how to train employees to become managers to ensure they succeed in their new role.
While they may vary depending on the department, the following managerial qualities are vital for succeeding in any management position, and often come up as trouble spots for those new to leadership roles.
The good news is that most people are promoted to management because they are recognized for their results-driven attitude and ability to build relationships, which are vital to possessing these top managerial qualities. Oftentimes however, new managers have room to improve on some or all of these five top qualities. Here are three steps to transitioning associates into managerial roles:
Making sure managers are aligned with company goals and performing their best makes employees happy and business smoother. With these simple steps, you can help your managers reach their full potential. 
Check out our article about tips on how to identify managers when you’re recruiting, or contact a Paycor representative to see how we can help with your HR needs.
 Previous:
Next:
Stay up to date with the latest HR trends

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Employee satisfaction surveys are a great way to stay in tune with what your employees are thinking. Get real insights on how to engage and motivate your team.

        Article      
Read Time: 10 min
Employee burnout can impact work quality and morale. Discover the warning signs for burnout and how to prevent it in your workplace.

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Being an effective leader requires more than just technical knowledge. Create an environment where everyone can thrive and understand emotions in oneself and others.
HCM Software
HR + Payroll Software
Talent Management
Workforce Management
Employee Experience
Benefits Administration
Quick Links
Services + Support
855-565-3285
Talk to Sales
855-752-8564
© 2023 Paycor, Inc  |  Refer Paycor  |  Privacy Policy  |  1-800-501-9462 |
*Represents approximately 30,000 corporate clients covering 40,000 businesses employing people