ICYMI: The Top Takeaways from Paycor’s 2022 Virtual Summit

Catch up on every session from this year's Virtual Summit from Paycor. Session topics include FLSA compliance, succession planning, remote work rules, and more.

Workforce Management
Last Updated: April 25, 2022 | Read Time: 6 min
This year’s record-breaking Virtual Summit was one for the history books. Our phenomenal speakers covered everything from FLSA compliance and succession planning to remote work rules, culture, burnout and so much more! If you couldn’t catch every session, don’t worry – we’ve got you covered. We’ve prepared an executive summary below to give you an overview of the hard-hitting points.
Internally promoted leaders have a 65% success rate over externally sourced leaders with a 52% success rate. Preparing your organization for the future with succession planning requires building a pipeline for the most critical roles, which might be in production and not necessarily in the C-suite. Here are some of the top tips for succession planning:
Developing an EVP is critical to retention, but it is not a one-time thing. Those developing it should ask: How do we want associates to feel? And, it should be used for attracting new candidates, retaining employees and guide the lifecycle of their term with your organization. Here are the 6 steps to an EVP:
In this session Amy shared her prediction that we will be chasing good people with wage increases until 2024, however, there are other great ways to attract and retain employees. Flexibility is high on that list, as are the following tips:
Remote work rules can be dizzying if you have employees living and working in several different states. This session provided a helpful overview of the things you need to consider if you are managing this for your workforce.
In a candid Q&A with Paycor CHRO Paaras Parker, we learned that retention requires a multidimensional approach. Additionally, turnover often can be traced back to the employer from a lack of clarity or expectations. Here are a few more key takeaways:
Understanding burnout can help you to transform it. The three causes of burnout are either exhaustion, cynicism or inefficacy. But, self-care practices can be translated into workplace culture (stress-reduction, building connections). Companies that intentionally manage culture increase revenues, retain employees, offer better customer service and maintain high morale. Culture matters and positive workplaces provide the breeding ground for brilliance (and heal us from burnout)! You can make culture a part of your strategy by embedding practices into day-to-day activities and taking intentional actions that break down to habits and behaviors.
We take great pride in empowering leaders with expert-led sessions and timely resources. To view webinars on-demand and to see what’s coming up next, visit our HR Center of Excellence.
 Previous:
Next:
Stay up to date with the latest HR trends

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Employee satisfaction surveys are a great way to stay in tune with what your employees are thinking. Get real insights on how to engage and motivate your team.

        Article      
Read Time: 10 min
Employee burnout can impact work quality and morale. Discover the warning signs for burnout and how to prevent it in your workplace.

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Being an effective leader requires more than just technical knowledge. Create an environment where everyone can thrive and understand emotions in oneself and others.
HCM Software
HR + Payroll Software
Talent Management
Workforce Management
Employee Experience
Benefits Administration
Quick Links
Services + Support
855-565-3285
Talk to Sales
855-752-8564
© 2023 Paycor, Inc  |  Refer Paycor  |  Privacy Policy  |  1-800-501-9462 |
*Represents approximately 30,000 corporate clients covering 40,000 businesses employing people