Coronavirus: Support Center For Business Leaders

Get the latest expert advice and news to help your business navigate the coronavirus public health emergency.

Employee Experience
Last Updated: September 14, 2021 | Read Time: 24 min
Learn the latest information on vaccination requirements in our recently recorded webinar, Vaccine Mandates: What HR Needs to Know Now
Talk to a Paycor Consultant Today
You’ll want to act quickly for everyone’s safety, warn those who may have come in contact with a potentially contagious coworker, and respect employee privacy. So, it’s a balancing act. In this article, we share best practices.
Employers, especially in the healthcare industry, face an annual challenge ensuring that enough staff take shots against flu and other viruses. Positive news about vaccines against COVID-19 means that employers may soon have new decisions to make about how best to keep workplaces safe. We take a look at the compliance issues companies face when considering mandatory vaccine policies. For more ideas, download our free employee employee vaccination policy template.
Working from home is the new reality for employees all across the country, and employees’ working lives are suddenly looking very different. Employers may wonder how this impacts overtime compliance. Here’s everything you need to know.
The uncertainty and distress caused by COVID-19 may lead some employees to request unpaid leave. If so, you’ll want to accept the request and explain your leave of absence policy in detail. There’s a lot to include so we’re helping out by sharing a downloadable template.
What should you do if your organization is requiring employees to work from home but you don’t have enough laptops or devices to go around? Read this article to access a free BYOD template and start building a policy today.
If your company is already set up to manage work from home arrangements, you’re ahead of the curve. If you need help making the transition, please read one of our most popular articles are making WFH work for your team.
Federal, state and local governments agree: those who can work at home, should. For employees whose jobs require them to be in the office, there are still ways to stay safe. We’ve created an infographic that visualizes eight steps HR leaders can take to maintain social distancing in an office environment.
In the face of mounting COVID-19 infections in the United States, many companies are asking their employees to work from home. But if your company is planning to weather the storm and you have employees who are required to work on-site, the first step is to do everything you can to help guarantee their safety. Here are things you can do immediately.
As America gradually returns to work in phases, many businesses will want to implement a mask policy for safety, and some will want it to be a mandatory feature of our new normal. In this article, we’ll review your options and share a downloadable Workplace Mask Policy template.
Returning employees will likely have a lot of questions about what the “new normal” means for them and what’s being done to safeguard their health. A great way to answer these questions is to send a Welcome Back Letter. Read on for what to include and download a customizable Welcome Back Letter template.
To get America back to work and ensure employee safety, many SMBs are considering implementing workplace testing. But how will it work? Find out the pros and cons of testing for the virus itself, using temperature scanners or requiring self-certification. To help businesses, we are offering a free downloadable COVID testing policy template.
Social distancing will be necessary in many workplaces for some time to come, and this isn’t just about employees—you also need to have a plan in place for those who are visiting. Read this article for what policies you’ll want to have in place and download our free COVID visitor policy template.
Much of America is now working remotely and some may never return to the office. To keep employees productive and engaged, wherever they are, it’s up to employers to supply the necessary tools and equipment. Download our free checklist of useful equipment for remote workers.
Remote work and video interviews might be here to stay, even after COVID. And while in-person interviews have natural advantages, there are ways to make the remote interview process effective and even fun.
Loneliness, depression, job loss, balancing working from home with kids, family members and friends are all taking a toll on the mental health of employees. Here are 5 ways business leaders can reduce the stress and uncertainty for their employees during this difficult time.
At some point furloughs will end and you’ll need employees to return to work. Read this article for what a Furlough Recall Letter should include and download a customizable template.
Is remote work the new normal or just a temporary measure? SMBs are deciding to what extent telecommuting is here to stay but before they can do that, it’s important to hear from employees about what they think. Read more for best practices on what questions to ask and download our Work From Home Survey Template.
We never thought we’d be onboarding in a global public health emergency, but here we are. You’ll find that the best practices of onboarding remain, but the process is changing. Learn how to transition your hiring and onboarding process to a virtual environment without missing a beat.
As many businesses see remote work becoming their future, HR teams are working overtime to craft policies and best practices to make this widespread and sudden transition a success. Read more about the importance of information security policies and other issues to consider. We’ve also included a downloadable customizable Remote Work Information Security Policy template.
Online meetings aren’t new, but right now they are more important than ever. It’s a big adjustment for some but learning to communicate effectively as a remote team can help your organization better navigate this crisis.
Suddenly, more people are working from home than ever. That’s got some leaders wondering if we ever go back to the office and, if we do, what that looks like. Transitioning some or all of your operations to a virtual environment is a big step. Do you know how your team feels about it? In this article we tick of the pros/cons and provide a WFH survey template you can customize and send to your employees to get their thoughts on remote work.
Some companies are still in the middle of furloughs and layoffs while others are scrambling to hire quickly. Those companies looking for candidates may find themselves in an unusual situation: they might be overwhelmed by resumes. How do HR teams of one handle an influx of candidates? And what does recruiting look like when we’re all supposed to stand at least six feet apart? Here’s what you need to know.
One method to help limit the spread of COVID-19 is to practice social distancing. As a result, many businesses are encouraging (or mandating) employees to work from home. For some employees, this new reality won’t pose a challenge. But for those workers working from home for the first time, it’s challenging and tough to manage. Luckily, we’ve outlined some helpful tips and strategies to make time away from the office productive.
The labor market has changed beyond all recognition in a matter of weeks, giving SMBs who are able to hire new opportunities and challenges. Learn how to improve your organization by making the most of the increased talent pool.
Small businesses who were successful with PPP loan applications face being hit with costly repayment if their spending doesn’t qualify for forgiveness. The good news is, the Small Business Association has finally released guidance on what expenditures are allowed and how to apply for forgiveness and. Here’s everything you need to know.
In response to the COVID-19 pandemic, there have been legislative changes that have immediate impacts to SMB leaders. To help, we’ve created this cheat sheet with information and resources to help you stay ahead of the curve.
Supplemental Unemployment Benefit plans give laid off employees’ additional income. They also offer employers a tax-efficient alternative to traditional severance packages. Here’s everything you need to know.
The Families First Coronavirus Response Act gives employees new rights to paid sick leave and emergency FMLA. Read more on the scenarios in which employees qualify for this leave and download a free COVID-related Leave Request Form.
The health and safety of your employees is top priority. What guidance does the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) provide? Here’s what we know so far.
The DOL published regulations on paid leave programs that extend through December 31, 2020. In this article, we review which businesses are impacted, how to manage new regulations and offer a template to provide your employees requesting leave due to COVID-19.
The Paycheck Protection Program (part of the CARES act) offers small businesses loans of up to $10 million to help cover payroll, payroll protection and other essential costs during the pandemic. Here’s an FAQ on how to apply, who qualifies, and more..
As America mounts a defense against the coronavirus, HR leaders on the frontlines are delivering the truly heartbreaking news of layoffs to employees who, just weeks ago, were top performers. In this article we’ll provide templates and forms you can use to check the boxes. But more importantly, we’ll offer our thoughts on how best to have these tough conversations.
What counts as an essential business or an essential employee? Read our article on everything you need to know and download a customizable Essential Business Letter template to give to your employees.
Throughout the country, many small businesses are being forced to close their doors or greatly scale back operations. To help provide economic support to small businesses impacted by the pandemic, the federal government will provide targeted, low-interest disaster recovery loans. Here is an overview of how small businesses can apply and terms and conditions.
The Families First Coronavirus Response Act requires employers with under 500 employees to give sick leave and paid family medical leave to eligible employees. If you’re looking for guidance on how to manage affected employees, check out the following scenarios.
Thanks to the Families First Coronavirus Response Act, employees who are unable to work because their children’s school or day care facilities are now closed due to the pandemic can claim emergency sick leave and paid family medical leave. Here’s everything employers need to know.
The CARES Act was created to provide financial relief to those impacted economically as a result of the Coronavirus pandemic. For more details on what’s included, read our latest article.
We’re excited to announce the release of Paycor’s COVID-19 Command Center, a new analytics solution that delivers instant insights for crisis management.
While Americans gradually return to work, businesses still need to be on alert. The reality is, a 2nd wave of Coronavirus is possible. Now is the time for SMB leaders to plan what action they’ll take if a second-wave outbreak reaches their community. Here, we offer some best practices for what this contingency planning should include.
Finding trustworthy sources with the most current information can be challenging for HR leaders during this unprecedented crisis. To help you stay informed so you can effectively communicate to your workforce, we’ve identified the top 10 sources covering the pandemic.
The COVID-19 outbreak is spreading quickly, and many small business leaders are rapidly responding in real time. Here are seven strategic steps your business can take now.
The key to successful decision making is good information. That’s why it’s essential that all SMB leaders take the time to get informed about what Coronavirus (COVID-19) is, the symptoms to look for and best practices to prevent it spreading.
Communication is going to be key in the coming weeks. Crisis management communications requires rapid, coordinated execution. In this article, we’ll share tips for communicating to employees and customers as the reality on the ground changes day by day (and even hour by hour).
For 30 years, Paycor has lived by the motto: take care of clients, take care of each other and do the right thing. They are our Guiding Principles and we believe they are widely shared by so many business leaders across this country. We can and will get through this together. Contact our team today to learn how we can support your business.
 Previous:
Next:
Stay up to date with the latest HR trends

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Employee satisfaction surveys are a great way to stay in tune with what your employees are thinking. Get real insights on how to engage and motivate your team.

        Article      
Read Time: 10 min
Employee burnout can impact work quality and morale. Discover the warning signs for burnout and how to prevent it in your workplace.

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Being an effective leader requires more than just technical knowledge. Create an environment where everyone can thrive and understand emotions in oneself and others.
HCM Software
HR + Payroll Software
Talent Management
Workforce Management
Employee Experience
Benefits Administration
Quick Links
Services + Support
855-565-3285
Talk to Sales
855-752-8564
© 2023 Paycor, Inc  |  Refer Paycor  |  Privacy Policy  |  1-800-501-9462 |
*Represents approximately 30,000 corporate clients covering 40,000 businesses employing people