The Ins and Outs of Small Business Start-Up Costs

If you are considering launching a startup, check out our list of small business startup costs. It's the small expenses that have the potential to make or break a great idea.

Workforce Management
Last Updated:  July 28, 2020 | Read Time: 7 min
The thought of owning their very own successful small business is an exciting dream for a lot of people. The appeal of not answering to anyone, aside from customers, can be a real driving force for someone who wants to step away from a 9-5 job. Before stepping away from a stable income, however, potential small business owners need to take a step back and think about the actual costs to get started. We’ve compiled this handy list of financial considerations to think about prior to taking the big leap into ownership.
Before you can even start, you need to know these three things:
Your startup costs will be driven by the answers to those three questions.
Not surprisingly, a company that provides a service typically is less expensive to start up than a company that provides a physical object. Starting a bakery will probably be more expensive than starting a consulting business due to the equipment, supplies, brick and mortar building, and inventory required.
Determining your startup costs is probably the least fun—yet the most critical part—of starting a business. But taking the time to do it will force you to pin down details of your new venture before you get started. Getting your business off the ground isn’t about making immediate huge strides forward. It’s the little bits of planning that can add up to your success.
Disclaimer: this article does not construe tax or legal advice. Please contact your tax advisor or attorney for specific guidance.

 Previous:
Next:
Stay up to date with the latest HR trends

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Employee satisfaction surveys are a great way to stay in tune with what your employees are thinking. Get real insights on how to engage and motivate your team.

        Article      
Read Time: 10 min
Employee burnout can impact work quality and morale. Discover the warning signs for burnout and how to prevent it in your workplace.

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Being an effective leader requires more than just technical knowledge. Create an environment where everyone can thrive and understand emotions in oneself and others.
HCM Software
HR + Payroll Software
Talent Management
Workforce Management
Employee Experience
Benefits Administration
Quick Links
Services + Support
855-565-3285
Talk to Sales
855-752-8564
© 2023 Paycor, Inc  |  Refer Paycor  |  Privacy Policy  |  1-800-501-9462 |
*Represents approximately 30,000 corporate clients covering 40,000 businesses employing people