How HRIS Software is Redefining Human Resources

HRIS software is redefining human resources management today. Discover its impact in managing automation processes and employee productivity improvements.

Talent Management
Last Updated: January 13, 2023 | Read Time: 16 min
When it comes to a business it doesn’t matter what the industry is or the size of the company or where they are located, EVERY business has one thing in common—the true heroes of their workplace are found in Human Resources. Who else could handle:
And the HR specialists seem to do it all at the right time. And effortlessly. So what’s the secret?
HR software. It could be HRIS, HCM or HRMS. No matter what the flavor is, an HR software system can help keep a business organized, growing and compliant. Let’s take a look at what HR software systems are available and how they can support an HR team.
These different terms mostly represent different ways of looking at HR software.
With that understanding, let’s take a closer look at an HRIS software solution.
Every HR leader has a horror story of an employee sitting across the desk and needing one specific piece of information. The employee goes from asking the question to staring dumbfoundedly as the HR leader fumbles across files, trying to find the answer.
The two pillars of HRIS are specifically designed to make that situation ancient lore not tomorrow’s reality.
HRIS software is designed to help HR teams do two very specific things:
HRIS enables organizational consistency across the enterprise. It does this by automating many key data collection processes so there’s no longer the burden on the HR team for remembering to ask for X. The system will make the management of those tactical functions more automatic while also encouraging employees in some ways to help develop their own profile.
This need for a centralized, scalable, and consistent data space is important but also takes on an additional level of urgency when looking forward. That’s because a recent survey found that 74% of companies in the U.S. have a permanent hybrid work model in place or are planning on implementing one.
The goal of collecting employee data of course is not just to have it but to use it. An HRIS makes it easy to do that for HR teams. For example, it can help HR track and plan an employee’s career path including growth plans and promotion milestones. In doing so, areas where adjustments are needed will be quickly discovered and addressed just as career growth paths can be charted and managed.
Software is changing how HR works. Over time, the role of an HR specialist is becoming less focused on administration and more on developing personnel strategies that will meet business goals. Paycor research found HR teams used to spend up to 70% of their time on simple, inefficient admin tasks. This wasn’t just time-consuming; making calculations by spreadsheets or pen and paper meant making costly errors that had to be fixed later.
HRIS software helps with this transition to strategy while also helping HR leaders find more time in their day by taking over core HR functions. Let’s look at 8 ways an HRIS can take on key tasks in talent management.
The big board is no longer needed. You know, that board in the break room that has written on it who’s out and when for vacations, PTO, maternity/paternity time off or an afternoon appointment. It was helpful, but an HRIS provides a more timely, accurate and measurable way to track who’s in and who’s out.
An HRIS can be helpful not just in managing the employees of today but those of tomorrow as well. Every recruiting interaction—from the initial employee contact through the interview process and eventual offer can be managed and tracked through the system. And key team members can view this information in real time. It eliminates unforced errors (bringing the wrong person in for an interview for example) and those doorway drive-bys of people asking what’s going on with Candidate X.
One of the things many HR departments try to do is foster growth from within their employee base. And of course one of the ways this can be accomplished is with external training and internal upskilling.
Links to external training opportunities can be incorporated into individual employee profiles or the broader training section of the HRIS. You could also use the scheduling feature to coordinate internal cross-training and upskilling opportunities.
HR, accounting, legal, product development—there are many departments in a company with a consistent eye on compliance law. Maintaining compliance can be particularly tricky for an HR department of a multi-state or even multi-national corporation.
Your HRIS can help mitigate some of these concerns by enabling you to:
Maintain all compliance-centric documentation in a centralized location
Create alerts around certain compliance-related topics. So for existence if the overtime rules changes in an area or if there are new requirements regarding HIPAA (Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act) you would be notified immediately.
It always starts with the email. And then the phone call. Finally you’re stopping by their desk asking an employee for some piece of information to complete their employee record. This:
With an HRIS, that entire process becomes less onerous as many of the processes are automated. This process change also helps employees to feel more connected to their career growth path.
Anyone in HR knows that efficiency and speed are critical, particularly when dealing with unexpected moments of HR crisis’. With an HRIS it’s easier to collect employee information and thanks to its organizational attributes (including things like search filters, storage categories and document displays) easier to find that information whenever you need to.
This will, of course, result in improved productivity which could mean you will have time to develop many of the employee support programs you’ve always wanted to initiate.
Every employee wants to be proud of where they work and have confidence in the system. But when they have to go to four different sites and find their paper enrollment packet for some insurance questions, that confidence is likely to be replaced with frustration. And unfortunately that frustration is often turned toward HR.
But an HRIS can help keep that confidence intact by providing one location that can tie in with all associated systems to easily offer access to benefits details.
Where are all of the pertinent HR docs? Saved on the drive? Maybe on the old server? Is the latest on your desktop? A Teams folder? Are things tucked into email messages? Is that something you shared on Slack?
Document management has always been a concern and that concern has only grown as we’ve increasingly moved into a virtual working environment. An HRIS provides a centralized storage location for all important employee documentation, starting with that initial recruiting contact. And, its self-service features mean that employees can upload and review the documents they need, when they need them. And regardless of when that is, they’ll be certain to get the right version, every time.
There is one thing an HRIS doesn’t do, it doesn’t replace the humanity of HR. The heart and soul of HR has always been their ability to be empathetic as they help employees at their company develop their potential.
Some HR leaders may be under the (false) assumption that their company is “not big enough” to see real talent management benefits from an HRIS. In fact there are numerous benefits that any HR team could see by engaging with HRIS software. Four of the key benefits are:
Using HRIS software can enable HR leaders to concentrate on the more tactical facets of the job including:
You don’t want to leave these decisions down to a gut-feeling—that’s why HRIS software gives HR leaders the tools they need to analyze data and spot trends.
The upside of HR software doesn’t stop there. Employees will also be empowered with self-service functionality. For example:
Ultimately, when companies are able to devote more resources to the strategic aspects of HR like learning and development, compensation planning and performance management, employees will benefit. And when they do, the company benefits as well.
Paycor creates HR software for leaders who want to make a difference. For 30 years, we’ve been listening to, and partnering with, leaders so we know what they need: HR technology that saves time, powerful analytics that provide actionable insights and dedicated support from HR experts. That’s why more than 30,000 businesses trust Paycor to help them solve problems and achieve their goals.
 Previous:
Next:
Stay up to date with the latest HR trends

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Employee satisfaction surveys are a great way to stay in tune with what your employees are thinking. Get real insights on how to engage and motivate your team.

        Article      
Read Time: 10 min
Employee burnout can impact work quality and morale. Discover the warning signs for burnout and how to prevent it in your workplace.

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Being an effective leader requires more than just technical knowledge. Create an environment where everyone can thrive and understand emotions in oneself and others.
HCM Software
HR + Payroll Software
Talent Management
Workforce Management
Employee Experience
Benefits Administration
Quick Links
Services + Support
855-565-3285
Talk to Sales
855-752-8564
© 2023 Paycor, Inc  |  Refer Paycor  |  Privacy Policy  |  1-800-501-9462 |
*Represents approximately 30,000 corporate clients covering 40,000 businesses employing people