Using Pre-Hire Testing & Assessment When Recruiting Employees

Pre-hire assessments are the process of using tests and questionnaires to screen potential employees for job openings. Learn why companies have implemented testing.

Talent Management
Last Updated: September 15, 2022 | Read Time: 12 min
Pre-hire testing or pre-hire assessment is the process of using various questionnaires to screen candidates for job openings. These tests typically measure areas such as cognitive ability, critical thinking skills, personality, work preferences, and motivation.
The use of hiring assessments is on the rise. Nearly 60% of companies use some type of assessment in their pre-hire process (Aberdeen Strategy & Research). Companies use these hiring assessments as a more quantifiable way of evaluating candidates. According to the publisher of the Myers-Briggs Type Indicator (MBTI) test, 88% of the Fortune 500 companies use their personality test as a way to screen candidates and predict future success.
So why are so many companies adopting the use of standardized pre-hire testing and hiring assessments? Isn’t a few rounds of phone interviews and on-site meetings enough? As it turns out, according to a CareerBuilder survey, 75% of employers have discovered a lie on applicants’ resumes. Falsehoods include claiming credit for projects the candidate wasn’t actually involved in and exaggerating skills and accomplishments. The in-person interview gives the hiring committee a relatively quick, surface-level view of the candidate as a potential employee and is a better measure of the employee’s charisma and persuasive power than actual job performance . References provided to employers as a part of the background check process are often friends of candidates who do little to verify the candidate’s actual qualifications and personality traits. Because of this, many employers have adopted a customized approach to interviews, often including a brief project, test, or working “case study” as a part of the hiring process. The problem with simply using tests, projects, and case studies is that they only measure the candidate’s performance in one instance, on one project, and in the artificial environment/situation that is created when a candidate is under pressure to “impress” the hiring manager. Tests and case studies don’t truly show the full picture of the candidate, nor do they capture whether the candidate is likely to succeed and stay in the role.
Pre-hire testing enables companies to screen for more than just charisma and interviewing skills. The process also helps turn the search for the right candidate into more than just ticking a checklist of skills and qualifications. Hiring assessments can evaluate a range of applicable skills and personality traits including:
The second part of hiring the right candidate is making sure you select someone who will be happy with and stay in the position. Employees who aren’t the right personality fit for a job can result in lower engagement in the role, which leads to lower productivity, higher turnover, and ultimately higher costs for your company. We’ve all seen the statistics that emphasize how expensive and time-consuming it is to hire, train, and then replace an employee who leaves. Bad hires cost companies a lot of money.
With hiring assessments, you can test for personality traits and soft skills that are strong indicators of a candidate’s personality fit with both the role and the overall organization. The results can show you whether a candidate is likely to stay in the role and fit in with the company culture. If preserving your company culture (or improving it) is a priority, pre-hire assessments can also show you which candidates are likely to supplement your existing culture or help to create the culture you are striving for.
Hiring the right candidate is especially important when you’re looking for people managers and roles that work across multiple departments since personalities and work styles very often affect the overall retention rate of the rest of your employees. We all know that when someone who isn’t the right fit is hired, the overall morale of the department and retention of affected teams can drop. That’s definitely something you want to avoid!
Many other factors and personality traits can help predict if a candidate will be the right fit for a position and company, including:
These hard and soft skills aren’t always obvious and are difficult to screen for during a standard interview. That’s why many companies have adopted pre-hire testing and hiring assessments to select the best candidates.
Dozens of tests, both paid and free, are available for companies that choose to conduct pre-hire assessments. We’ve outlined a few here.
If you want to choose the right test, you’ll need to keep a few factors in mind. The first thing to understand is exactly what information your company or hiring managers are looking for. Depending on the team you are hiring for or the industry your company is in, you may need a different type of test to address your varying needs. A company hiring senior-level executives in the technology industry, for example, will likely be more focused on screening candidates for cognitive ability and overall personality traits. A company in the food and beverage industry will generally be more focused on screening candidates for certain behavioral factors such as sociability, timeliness, and conscientiousness.
As a general rule of thumb, regardless of the type of test you choose, you should find a pre-hire assessment that is:
You can conduct pre-hire assessments at various stages in the interview process, depending on the needs of your company. The most common stages are:
So, there you have it! What are your current pre-hire assessment needs? Paycor has a full-featured applicant tracking system designed by recruiters for every stage of the hiring process. We’ve been in your shoes, tried out a ton of products, and we’ve added integrations to the best of the best.
Finding, interviewing, and hiring talented people are the most important challenges businesses face, especially in today’s world. Paycor Recruiting is a solution designed and built by recruiters for recruiters and HR hiring teams to help you solve your hiring problems and optimize your recruiting process.
 Previous:
Next:
Stay up to date with the latest HR trends

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Employee satisfaction surveys are a great way to stay in tune with what your employees are thinking. Get real insights on how to engage and motivate your team.

        Article      
Read Time: 10 min
Employee burnout can impact work quality and morale. Discover the warning signs for burnout and how to prevent it in your workplace.

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Being an effective leader requires more than just technical knowledge. Create an environment where everyone can thrive and understand emotions in oneself and others.
HCM Software
HR + Payroll Software
Talent Management
Workforce Management
Employee Experience
Benefits Administration
Quick Links
Services + Support
855-565-3285
Talk to Sales
855-752-8564
© 2023 Paycor, Inc  |  Refer Paycor  |  Privacy Policy  |  1-800-501-9462 |
*Represents approximately 30,000 corporate clients covering 40,000 businesses employing people