Executive Summary: 2020 October HR & Compliance Virtual Summit

On October 13-15, thousands of HR & business leaders attended the Summit to learn from industry experts. See a recap here.

Employee Experience
Last Updated:  October 22, 2020 | Read Time: 13 min
“This was the best Virtual Summit I’ve even been to!”
“Such a great presentation! Thank you for this awesome experience.”
“The webinar sessions were so good that I wish there were more!”
This is just a sample of feedback from attendees at Paycor’s October HR & Compliance Virtual Summit!
On October 13-15, thousands of HR & business leaders attended the Summit to learn from industry experts. They walked away with actionable tips and timely advice around recruiting trends, compliance, maintaining a safe and healthy work environment and so much more!
Did you miss any of the live sessions? Don’t worry, we’ve got you covered. You can watch them on our On-Demand Webinars page.
In the meantime, check out our executive summary for a quick overview.
Speaker: Kara Govro
As businesses reopen their offices and workplaces, employers must act to provide safe and healthy working environments. In this webinar, Kara Govro discussed safety strategies for offices, what to do if an employee has been diagnosed with COVID and what you should be thinking about with respect to sick leave policies.
Making the Workplace Safe
To prevent the spread of COVID at your office, Kara recommends focusing on personal hygiene and modifications to your workplace:
Masks
Workplace Modifications for Customers
Workplace Modifications for Employees
1. Inform Employees of Possible Exposure
Employees should be notified of potential exposure in the workplace but should not be told who’s sick. Employees may not like that they can’t gauge their own risk, but the ADA requires this information to remain confidential.
2. Determine if Exposed Employees Need to Quarantine
These aren’t precisely defined terms, but the general rule is if an employee was less than 6 feet apart from a person with COVID for 15 minutes or more, they should quarantine.
Here are two examples:
Standing together on a production line – Quarantine
Sitting two cubicles apart – Probably not necessary
3. CDC Guidance for Disinfecting Areas Used by an Employee Diagnosed with COVID-19
4. COVID Leave Law Compliance: Check State and Local Law
To learn more, watch the on-demand webinar here.
Speaker: Amy Letke
HR is a heavily regulated industry and election years always bring a degree of uncertainty as those regulations tend to shift pending election results. In this webinar, Amy Letke discussed possible changes, examined the differences between the two administrations and provided tips for how HR and business leaders can prepare for life after November 3rd.
All information provided is non-partisan and based on facts. Content was collected from non-biased resources like The Wall Street Journal, Newswire and the candidates’ websites.
Trump
Biden
Trump
Biden
Trump
Biden
Trump
Biden
To learn more, watch the full on-demand webinar here.
Speaker: Joey Price
In the midst of so much change in 2020, one thing remains constant: employees depend on HR leaders for support and help. But what happens when you throw virtual workplaces, shutdowns and uncertainty into the mix? For starters you may see a loss in employee motivation and productivity. According to Joey, in order to help employees win at work, HR leaders must create a winning environment and empower everyone to play their part.
But first, HR leaders need to understand the four truths about employee expectations at work:
To build a culture where employees are excited to go to work on Monday, not Friday, HR leaders need to help employees answer these internal questions:
To learn more, watch the on-demand webinar here.
Speaker: John Throckmorton
With the unemployment rate at 7.9%, the recruiting market now leans in favor of employers. More qualified candidates results in more applicants, and more applicants create more opportunities.
In this session, John Throckmorton covers the top recruiting trends in 2021:
1. Job Ad Videos
To reach a larger pool of applicants, recruiters are embedding videos into Facebook ads to promote job openings. With more than 5 billion videos watched each day, video is the #1 way to reach job candidates.
Here are some best practices for creating job ad videos:
2. Pre-recorded Video Interviews
These are interviews conducted where the interviewer isn’t present to ask the candidate questions. They’re also known as one-way interviews.
How they work: recruiters pre-set the questions concerning a specific job and send candidates a link through which they can record their answers within a deadline. Once a candidate submits their video, the recruiter can the review and evaluate in order to assess if the candidate would be a good cultural fit and decide whether to invite them to a face-to-face—or video chat—interview.
3. Chatbots
While chatbots have grown in popularity as a customer service tool, HR leaders are now leveraging them for recruiting purposes.
Here’s how they can help:
4. Intelligent Screening of Resumes
More recruiters are using filters to prioritize resumes than ever before.
Here’s what filters can flag:
For more information on recruiting trends for 2021, watch the full on demand session here.
Speaker: Alissa Carpenter
In this session, Alissa Carpenter explains that building a diverse workplace is just the beginning. Inclusion and building a sense of belonging is where your organization should be headed.
Three Types of Diversity:
1. Demographic
2. Experiential
3. Cognitive
Why Do Organizations Struggle to Build Inclusive Cultures?
How HR Leaders Can Help Employees Feel Accepted and Drive a Sense of Belonging:
1. Listen with Intention and No Agenda
2. Team Building Events
3. Be Vulnerable
For more tips for building a diverse and inclusive culture, watch the full on-demand webinar here.
Speakers: Katherine Weber
The new reality of work has been a challenge for everyone, and that’s especially true for parents. During this session, Katherine Weber identified the many leave and accommodation laws that apply when an employee needs to take time off work due to unavailability of in-person school and child care due to COVID.
The ABCs of COVID Laws:
FFCRA
Effective until December 31, 2020, the FFCRA applies to private employers with fewer than 500 employees and most public employers.
This law includes two provisions:
Both EPSL and EFMLA cover leave due to COVID related closures of school and care providers.
State and Local Paid Sick Leave
Many state and local Paid Sick and Safe Leave laws provide time off work to care for a child who is ill or whose school has closed due to a public health emergency. Check with your state or legal team to ensure compliance.
FMLA
The Family and Medical Leave Act applies to employers with 50+ employees. It provides 12 weeks of leave for an employee to care for a family member with a serious health condition.
Employees must meet these requirements to receive FMLA:
If you have employees who are parents, here are some creative solutions to support their work-life balance:
For more compliance tips watch the full on-demand webinar.
Explore Paycor’s collection of upcoming webinar series. In addition to these featured sessions, we host weekly webinars on a variety of HR and compliance topics.
Legal disclaimer: The information presented during the Virtual Summit and this executive summary is not intended as legal advice. Please consult your attorney or advisors for questions.
 Previous:
Next:
Stay up to date with the latest HR trends

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Employee satisfaction surveys are a great way to stay in tune with what your employees are thinking. Get real insights on how to engage and motivate your team.

        Article      
Read Time: 10 min
Employee burnout can impact work quality and morale. Discover the warning signs for burnout and how to prevent it in your workplace.

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Being an effective leader requires more than just technical knowledge. Create an environment where everyone can thrive and understand emotions in oneself and others.
HCM Software
HR + Payroll Software
Talent Management
Workforce Management
Employee Experience
Benefits Administration
Quick Links
Services + Support
855-565-3285
Talk to Sales
855-752-8564
© 2023 Paycor, Inc  |  Refer Paycor  |  Privacy Policy  |  1-800-501-9462 |
*Represents approximately 30,000 corporate clients covering 40,000 businesses employing people