Maternity Leave Laws by State

Employees are eligible for maternity leave before and after the birth of a child. See the laws in your state here.

Workforce Management
Last Updated:  July 29, 2020 | Read Time: 15 min
Companies that offer parents leave when they have or adopt a child have been shown to improve employee engagement and retention. The benefit also helps prevent a gender imbalance in the workplace. However, U.S. maternity leave law varies by state and industry and many workers still don’t have any access to paid parental leave.
Whether a parent is guaranteed time off varies state by state, and often depends on a company’s size and location. Companies with 50 or more employees must offer FMLA leave, though there are more extensive plans required in many states, some of which also cover smaller companies.
The United States has no national policy for maternity leave, but nine states have mandated a maternity leave policy on their own. Depending on the state leave may also be taken by fathers and after a child is adopted or fostered. Often maternity leave is covered by parental leave laws, but in other cases these rights only apply to mothers, not fathers.
While not a formal maternity leave policy, The Family and Medical Leave Act (FMLA) offers eligible employees 12 weeks of unpaid leave per year, with employment reinstatement rights, in various circumstances, which include the birth of a child, caring for a newborn and incapacity due to pregnancy. The law applies to federal employees, state workers and private companies; however, employees are only eligible if they work for companies that have 50 or more employees and have completed at least 1,250 hours of work in the previous year.
Many states go further than federal law when it comes to maternity leave. Some extend FMLA entitlement to smaller companies, while others guarantee paid leave. These policies differ according to eligibility, length of leave, and, if paid, how they are funded. In several states, pregnancy and childbirth qualify mothers for short-term disability benefits.
While not necessarily guaranteeing leave, other states require that pregnancy be treated as a temporary disability and so if a company provides paid leave for those with other temporary disabilities, they must do the same for pregnant employees.
Now, let’s break down leave laws for parents wherever you do business.
*This entry refers to state-wide California law. Cities and municipalities within California may offer extended benefits.
Paid family and medical leave (PFML) provides unpaid or paid time off (on average 6-12 weeks in a 12-month period) to be used for:
Paid family and medical leave may be provided through temporary disability insurance which is funded by contributions from the employer and/or the employee.
After exhausting 12 weeks of Family and Medical Leave Act (FMLA) benefits, there is no U.S. maternity leave program. The amount of additional paid or unpaid leave that is available is dependent on state law and, where no state law exists, is up to the employer’s discretion.
Paid maternity leave is voluntarily provided by employers. The Family and Medical Leave Act is 12 weeks of unpaid leave with job protections.
Paycor gives HR leaders the technology and expertise they need to stay compliant as well as hire, train and engage employees. When employees return from maternity leave, it’s important that they are successfully reintegrated into your business. For best practices, watch our webinar on How To Help New Parents Re-enter The Workplace And Thrive.
Paycor is not a legal, tax, benefit, accounting or investment advisor. All communication from Paycor should be confirmed by your company’s legal, tax, benefit, accounting or investment advisor before making any decisions.
 Previous:
Next:
Stay up to date with the latest HR trends

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Employee satisfaction surveys are a great way to stay in tune with what your employees are thinking. Get real insights on how to engage and motivate your team.

        Article      
Read Time: 10 min
Employee burnout can impact work quality and morale. Discover the warning signs for burnout and how to prevent it in your workplace.

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Being an effective leader requires more than just technical knowledge. Create an environment where everyone can thrive and understand emotions in oneself and others.
HCM Software
HR + Payroll Software
Talent Management
Workforce Management
Employee Experience
Benefits Administration
Quick Links
Services + Support
855-565-3285
Talk to Sales
855-752-8564
© 2023 Paycor, Inc  |  Refer Paycor  |  Privacy Policy  |  1-800-501-9462 |
*Represents approximately 30,000 corporate clients covering 40,000 businesses employing people