Burnout in Healthcare Workers: How to Prevent It

Healthcare burnout in workers is an occupational hazard. It's important to know how it affects you mentally. Learn how to prevent burnout before it happens!

Employee Experience
Last Updated: January 5, 2023 | Read Time: 10 min
Nearly 1.7 million people quit healthcare jobs in this year alone, according to the Bureau of Labor Statistics. And, while there are several factors contributing to the exodus, burnout tops the list.
The U.S. Department of Health and Human Services defines burnout as “…a long-term stress reaction marked by emotional exhaustion, depersonalization, and a lack of a sense of personal accomplishment.”
When someone is burned out, they not only feel chronic stress, energy depletion and cynicism at work, they also lose the desire to perform even the most basic tasks with any attention. And in a field like healthcare this can have serious safety concerns and life-altering consequences.
So, what can be done now to prevent burnout? To find the answer, let’s first explore what burnout is, where it comes from, how it’s impacting patient care, and what can be done about it.
To understand how to combat burnout, you must know what’s driving it. In the current climate of healthcare, there are many environmental stressors that contribute to burnout. Here’s a brief overview.
There isn’t any one red flag that a health worker will display that will indicate they are burned out. Rather, it’s a series of things that, when linked together, can point to a larger problem. For example, if someone is consistently unable to focus; misses deadlines; ignores meetings or only partially completed tasks, it can signify burnout. Other signals can be insensitivity, a lack of appropriate emotions and higher levels of cynicism.
In 2019 the World Health Organization (WHO) officially added “burnout” to its International Classification of Diseases. Like nearly every other disease on that list, burnout doesn’t just happen overnight. There’s a progression and that progression hits differently for everybody. While there’s no definitive way to tell what levels of burnout a person may be fighting, there are some common markers to watch for.
“Burnout among health workers has harmful consequences for patient care and safety. This includes decreased time spent between provider and patient, increased medical errors and hospital-acquired infections among patients, and staffing shortages.”
The effects of the severe burnout of a provider are not just felt by the healthcare worker who is experiencing those severe levels of occupational stress. Their colleagues, patients and patient families, as well as their own families are all affected. The system itself also feels the strain of a provider who is no longer performing at an acceptable level, if they even remain in a practice.
In a word: support. If healthcare workers are part of a larger network, hospital administrators and HR leaders could look to implement policies to help prevent and alleviate stress among staff such as planning activities that foster better coworker relationships, creating an employee support network, and structuring shift duties to make sure providers have time to recharge between shifts.
Conversely, if those healthcare workers are in a smaller, more self-managed practice it’s important for them to stay connected to their support system and the broader healthcare community. A workplace wellness program could be considered as well.
And in all cases, patients have a role to play by being kind, respectful and supportive of their healthcare providers.
There is no magic, immediate change that can be made to eliminate burnout in medical providers. Instead, there are a series of changes and adjustments that need to be made. These range from the way that healthcare providers approach their own health-related needs to adjusting our expectations as patients.
Note that it may not be enough to just have this space available, you may have to schedule time in it until its use develops into part of the daily routine.
To combat burnout of healthcare workers, you might want to take a holistic look at your organization. Where can stress be relieved? What additional support platforms can be put into place? One simple way to start is by streamlining work-related processes with the right HR technology. Paycor helps your organization improve its efficiency, alleviating stress to do vital tasks proficiently.
 Previous:
Next:
Stay up to date with the latest HR trends

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Employee satisfaction surveys are a great way to stay in tune with what your employees are thinking. Get real insights on how to engage and motivate your team.

        Article      
Read Time: 10 min
Employee burnout can impact work quality and morale. Discover the warning signs for burnout and how to prevent it in your workplace.

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Being an effective leader requires more than just technical knowledge. Create an environment where everyone can thrive and understand emotions in oneself and others.
HCM Software
HR + Payroll Software
Talent Management
Workforce Management
Employee Experience
Benefits Administration
Quick Links
Services + Support
855-565-3285
Talk to Sales
855-752-8564
© 2023 Paycor, Inc  |  Refer Paycor  |  Privacy Policy  |  1-800-501-9462 |
*Represents approximately 30,000 corporate clients covering 40,000 businesses employing people