7 Tips for an Effective Workplace Conflict Resolution System

Employee conflicts, often viewed as negative, can lead to periods of innovation. How managers handle conflicts can shift the confidence in leadership.

Employee Experience
Last Updated: September 23, 2022 | Read Time: 6 min
Anyone who’s been in the workforce for any length of time (even first-timers) understands that conflict and tension between employees in the workplace is pretty unavoidable. When you combine people of different backgrounds, belief systems, and personalities, it’s a guarantee that not everyone will hold hands and sing kumbaya together every day. Employee conflicts can either be incredibly destructive and tear teams apart or they can become productive communication avenues that can instead help teams become stronger.
Take innovation for example. It’s practically impossible to come up with new ideas without having a bit of productive inter-team conflict (key word “productive!). That’s why it’s important to build a workplace culture where employees feel secure in voicing new ideas that may challenge the status quo. That’s the good type of conflict.
Conflict in the workplace becomes destructive when employees don’t trust each other, and they treat the word collaboration as nothing more than a buzzword. Managers and frontline leaders need to spot the differences quickly and easily between toxic and healthy conflict in order to lead their teams towards peak performance.
Here are 7 tips to help you create a system to resolve conflict in the workplace.
All styles of managers, from those who are more intense and authority-driven to those who are more laid-back and casual, should take an active role in conflict resolution. Follow these 7 steps and find the method that feels right to you and then determine the best way to manage it—discuss, resolve, and grow as a result.
As you build a workplace culture that facilitates and accepts an environment where employees feel empowered to voice new, sometimes disruptive ideas that may create the good type of conflict, you may very likely witness increased innovation, as well as a positive impact on your company’s bottom line.
For help with staying up to speed on what’s happening in your work environment and identifying conflict before it becomes a problem, Paycor can help with Pulse Surveys. Frequent confidential surveys improve engagement, enhance trust, and provide leadership teams with access to data that will help tackle problems head-on.
 Previous:
Next:
Stay up to date with the latest HR trends

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Employee satisfaction surveys are a great way to stay in tune with what your employees are thinking. Get real insights on how to engage and motivate your team.

        Article      
Read Time: 10 min
Employee burnout can impact work quality and morale. Discover the warning signs for burnout and how to prevent it in your workplace.

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Being an effective leader requires more than just technical knowledge. Create an environment where everyone can thrive and understand emotions in oneself and others.
HCM Software
HR + Payroll Software
Talent Management
Workforce Management
Employee Experience
Benefits Administration
Quick Links
Services + Support
855-565-3285
Talk to Sales
855-752-8564
© 2023 Paycor, Inc  |  Refer Paycor  |  Privacy Policy  |  1-800-501-9462 |
*Represents approximately 30,000 corporate clients covering 40,000 businesses employing people