How (and Why) to Create an Employee Engagement Survey

The only way to really understand why people leave (or stay) is by asking them. In this article, we’ll examine the importance of an employee engagement survey.

Employee Experience
Last Updated:  August 29, 2018 | Read Time: 7 min
In today’s workforce, there’s a disconnect between why executives THINK employees leave and why they actually do. A recent Paycor survey found that 52% of business leaders believe that compensation is the top reasons employees leave; followed closely by career advancement (37%), poor performance (37%) and job/person mismatch (34%). On the flipside, employees cite bad managers as the top reason they choose to leave a role. In fact, bad managers account for 75% of voluntary turnover.
Search “causes of employee turnover” and you’ll countless results with insights and best practices. But at the end of the day, the only way to really understand why people leave (or stay) is by asking them. In this article, we’ll examine the importance of an employee engagement survey and tips to consider when designing your own internal survey. We’ll also share a list of potential employee engagement survey questions to get you started.
Employee engagement surveys provide a lot of valuable information and data to help you understand your people. Not only can you identify how they’re are feeling about their role and your organization, but by giving them a voice you’re ultimately establishing that you value their input which only enhances their level of engagement. But it’s what you do with the feedback that really separates great companies from the rest of the pack. For example: if survey results reveal that employees aren’t satisfied with training and development opportunities, creating an action plan that learning programs demonstrate that you’re using valuable data to drive positive organizational change. And once a change is made, you can use future surveys to measure the effectiveness of your new initiatives. By comparing results year-over-year, you can determine if you’re headed in the right direction or if further improvements are needed.

The basics make up the essential benefits and assets that employees expect out of your organization.
Asking employees to rate these factors should give you immediate insight into overall morale, what makes your employees tick and how they value these work essentials. Be sure to break out the results by department to identify problem areas or understand what successful business units are doing to stand out and promote strong engagement.
Your overall health represents the essential processes and functions of a successful and well-run organization. It starts from the top, by building a strong leadership team that creates clarity and cascades goals and objectives throughout the entire organization in a clear and effective manner. When your people understand company objectives, how their individual role contributes to overall success and believe in their manager, your people are more likely to be engaged and productive.
These are workforce traits related to your employees’ involvement and commitment to the organization. Simply put, are your employees motivated with their work, do they feel valued and are they likely to recommend your company to their network.

Now that we’ve reviewed how to structure the survey, let’s build out a list of sample questions you can tailor to fit your organization’s needs. No matter the tool you use, these questions can help you build the foundation for a meaningful and actionable survey.
An employee engagement survey can serve as a valuable tool to improve engagement and retention across your organization. If you’ve already implemented your own survey and are looking to make a few tweaks, or if you’re not quite ready to make the leap no fear, we have numerous resources available to create the ideal employee experience for your people. Click here to start exploring.
 Previous:
Next:
Stay up to date with the latest HR trends

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Employee satisfaction surveys are a great way to stay in tune with what your employees are thinking. Get real insights on how to engage and motivate your team.

        Article      
Read Time: 10 min
Employee burnout can impact work quality and morale. Discover the warning signs for burnout and how to prevent it in your workplace.

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Being an effective leader requires more than just technical knowledge. Create an environment where everyone can thrive and understand emotions in oneself and others.
HCM Software
HR + Payroll Software
Talent Management
Workforce Management
Employee Experience
Benefits Administration
Quick Links
Services + Support
855-565-3285
Talk to Sales
855-752-8564
© 2023 Paycor, Inc  |  Refer Paycor  |  Privacy Policy  |  1-800-501-9462 |
*Represents approximately 30,000 corporate clients covering 40,000 businesses employing people