3 Tips for Improving Staff Punctuality

Tardy employees can have a strong negative impact a business. Here are some great tips for improving staff punctuality in the workplace.

Employee Experience
Last Updated:  January 9, 2020 | Read Time: 5 min
Managers have enough on their plates without having to worry about employees being on time. But punctuality is by no means guaranteed among US employees, according to YouGov polling. First, the good news: 48% of employees are never late. The not so good news: that means that more than half of the workforce aren’t reliably punctual and, more problematically, 19% of employees are late at least once a week. These will often be younger employees—millennials are almost 50% less likely to be consistently punctual than older Americans (55+).
When managing someone who struggles to be on time, it can be hard to know what action to take. Anyone can get stuck in traffic. If they still manage to do a good job, a manager may choose to turn a blind eye—but what message does this sends to employees who do make the effort to be on time?
To make sure that enforcing an official timekeeping policy doesn’t add to a manager’s workload, an easy solution is to use time and attendance software, allowing employees to clock in on their way in and out of work. This can be as simple as swiping a key fob at the door, and at least ensures that employees know that any lateness will not go unnoticed.
It’s also true that some people are incurably late—they may actually perceive time differently to the rest of us, according to research by San Diego State University. Not ideal, you might think. But this can also be correlated with higher creativity and optimism, both valuable traits. Indeed, the quality of their work may force you to keep them around.
A bigger cause for concern is tardiness among previously punctual employees. But rather than taking any action, it’s important to find out the root cause. It could be as simple as road construction affecting their route to the office. However, it could be also be a sign that they are struggling to balance other commitments, or that their current hours are don’t work well for them. Worse, it might a sign that they are less engaged with their work, or even actively seeking to spend as little time in the office as possible.
Employees can also struggle if they are only finding out their shift times at the last minute. Staff scheduling software allows you to create more efficient schedules in less time, so that staff can find out when they are working far in advance—and rearrange their own plans accordingly.
And in cases where tardiness is really just a matter of forgetfulness, with scheduling software you can automate regular shift reminders—taking a load of the minds of both managers and employees. These can reduce the minutes lost to lateness by more than 16%, according to Paycor research.
As these tips make show, improving staff punctuality isn’t just about finding the right punishment. It’s about establishing clear expectations, understanding individual circumstances and doing every possible not just to make it easy for staff to be on time—but also ensuring that they want to be.

 Previous:
Next:
Stay up to date with the latest HR trends

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Employee satisfaction surveys are a great way to stay in tune with what your employees are thinking. Get real insights on how to engage and motivate your team.

        Article      
Read Time: 10 min
Employee burnout can impact work quality and morale. Discover the warning signs for burnout and how to prevent it in your workplace.

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Being an effective leader requires more than just technical knowledge. Create an environment where everyone can thrive and understand emotions in oneself and others.
HCM Software
HR + Payroll Software
Talent Management
Workforce Management
Employee Experience
Benefits Administration
Quick Links
Services + Support
855-565-3285
Talk to Sales
855-752-8564
© 2023 Paycor, Inc  |  Refer Paycor  |  Privacy Policy  |  1-800-501-9462 |
*Represents approximately 30,000 corporate clients covering 40,000 businesses employing people