15 Lesser-Known Black History Facts

Honoring Black History Month in the workplace helps build community and connection though education. Read Paycor’s article 15 Lesser-Known Black History Facts.

Employee Experience
Last Updated: January 11, 2022 | Read Time: 5 min
Honoring Black History Month in the workplace helps build community and connection though education. And although creating inclusive organizations isn’t achieved in one month, February is a good time for company leaders to dig deeper to understand diversity, equity and employee wellbeing.
Black history happens every day and there are always new endeavors to celebrate. There’s also some Black History Month trivia that’s lesser known to the population at large. Check out this brief rundown of how Black History Month started and some possible new-to-you facts on various topics that could inspire you to expand your learning beyond Black History Month.
Who Started Black History Month?
Harvard-educated historian and author, Dr. Carter G. Woodson, is credited with creating Black History Month. He was inspired after attending a 50th anniversary celebration of the 13th Amendment where various exhibits portrayed events in African American culture. With a mission to amplify Black people’s contributions and achievements, Woodson went on to create what is now known as the Association for the Study of Afro-American Life and History (ASALH). In 1926, Woodson and ASALH declared the second week of February—which aligned with Abraham Lincoln’s and Frederick Douglass’ birthdays—to be “Negro History Week.”
During the next 50 years, communities, schools and organizations started participating in the week-long recognition of African American trials and successes. As public interest grew, particularly during the 1960s civil rights movement, the celebration expanded from a week to a month. In 1976, President Gerald Ford declared February to be “Black History Month,” and congress passed a law in 1986 solidifying it as such.
Black History Month Trivia
For more free resources and tools that promote DE&I best practices in the workplace, visit Perspectives+. It’s Paycor’s online knowledge library designed to help our partner network drive change, empower colleagues, and foster new leaders.
 Previous:
Next:
Stay up to date with the latest HR trends

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Employee satisfaction surveys are a great way to stay in tune with what your employees are thinking. Get real insights on how to engage and motivate your team.

        Article      
Read Time: 10 min
Employee burnout can impact work quality and morale. Discover the warning signs for burnout and how to prevent it in your workplace.

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Being an effective leader requires more than just technical knowledge. Create an environment where everyone can thrive and understand emotions in oneself and others.
HCM Software
HR + Payroll Software
Talent Management
Workforce Management
Employee Experience
Benefits Administration
Quick Links
Services + Support
855-565-3285
Talk to Sales
855-752-8564
© 2023 Paycor, Inc  |  Refer Paycor  |  Privacy Policy  |  1-800-501-9462 |
*Represents approximately 30,000 corporate clients covering 40,000 businesses employing people