4 Tips for Nonprofit HR Management

Managing HR at a non-profit organization can be challenging, but these 4 tips will put you on the path to success.

Benefits Administration
Last Updated:  October 25, 2016 | Read Time: 4 min
Employee satisfaction and retention are crucial for the success of any
organization, but they’re particularly important within the non-profit

sector, which is known for attracting highly committed employees and
volunteers who are motivated by mission.
Nonprofit HR managers must ensure that they’re maximizing their
employees’ energy and enthusiasm to keep turnover low and engagement
high. Here are four tips for doing exactly that:
Talent recruitment and retention should be measured and framed as part
of over-arching organizational goals. HR managers must show how
keeping a driven, skilled staff affects the bottom line in terms of both

dollars saved and dollars generated. It’s also important for nonprofit
HR managers to effectively integrate paid staff with volunteer labor by
clarifying roles and expectations and facilitating collaboration between
both groups.
Although employees might be drawn to an organization on principle,
they need to be rewarded with a total benefits package that makes them

feel valued. Accurate, complete job descriptions will help HR leaders
develop appropriate compensation packages and will make it easier to
compare an organization’s offerings to those of other similar
nonprofits.
Employees—especially Millennials—in any sector seek and even expect the
chance to develop new skills, regardless of the size of their
organization. Whether through formal training via LMS systems, workshops or job
shadowing and cross-training, HR should design and encourage

opportunities for employees to grow beyond their current positions.
This improves job satisfaction and also makes succession planning easier
for future change.
HR managers need a system that allows them to track updated
information for all workers, whether full-time, part-time, paid or

unpaid. Such information includes hours worked, to ensure compliance
with legislation and tax regulations, as well as training,
certifications, licenses and continuing education credits. This helps
ensure that employees’ and volunteers’ skills are aligned with their
passion for your organization’s purpose.
Learn more about how to engage employees throughout their careers at
your organization. Download the whitepaper Employee Engagement: Why You Can’t Afford to Get it Wrong.
You can find out more about how Paycor can help nonprofit HR
professionals more strategically and efficiently manage their employees

and volunteers through our suite of solutions, including:
* A robust applicant tracking system
that streamlines the hiring process and prevents you from missing out on
top talent
* A human resource management application
that provides tools for training administration, document archiving and
employee communication through a secure portal
* An HR Support Center
that includes sample documentation for performance reviews, job
descriptions and numerous other useful forms
* Custom reporting
that allows HR and organizational leaders to compile and analyze data
quickly
* Time and attendance
tools that allow you to view and change employees’ and volunteers’
schedules and generate custom reports to track hours worked
Get in touch with Paycor to learn more
about how these solutions can empower your organization to focus on your
mission.
Source: The NonProfit Times

Enter your email below to receive a weekly recap of the latest articles
from Paycor’s Resource Center.


MktoForms2.loadForm("//app-ab01.marketo.com", "003-JWW-697", 1796);
Check your inbox

for an email confirming your subscription. Enjoy!
 Previous:
Next:
Stay up to date with the latest HR trends

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Employee satisfaction surveys are a great way to stay in tune with what your employees are thinking. Get real insights on how to engage and motivate your team.

        Article      
Read Time: 10 min
Employee burnout can impact work quality and morale. Discover the warning signs for burnout and how to prevent it in your workplace.

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Being an effective leader requires more than just technical knowledge. Create an environment where everyone can thrive and understand emotions in oneself and others.
HCM Software
HR + Payroll Software
Talent Management
Workforce Management
Employee Experience
Benefits Administration
Quick Links
Services + Support
855-565-3285
Talk to Sales
855-752-8564
© 2023 Paycor, Inc  |  Refer Paycor  |  Privacy Policy  |  1-800-501-9462 |
*Represents approximately 30,000 corporate clients covering 40,000 businesses employing people