5 Ways to Celebrate Black History Month at Work

In February we celebrate the achievements, history and culture of African Americans. Read Paycor’s article 5 Ways to Celebrate Black History Month at Work.

Employee Experience
Last Updated: January 11, 2022 | Read Time: 5 min
Every February we celebrate the contributions, achievements, history and culture of African Americans as part of Black History Month. Originally a weeklong celebration planned to correlate with the birthdays of Abraham Lincoln and Frederick Douglass (February 12th and 14th), what was known as “Negro History Week” grew over time into today’s Black History Month.
Talking about race can be complicated and you may hesitate to celebrate Black History Month at work for fear of “getting it wrong.” But downplaying our differences doesn’t make them go away. It’s up to HR and company leaders to set the standard of how to encourage the inclusion of all employees and eliminate bias (conscious and unconscious) in the workplace.
When planning Black History Month activities, there are some best practices to keep in mind:
Diversity and inclusion should be considered and incorporated into the workplace year-round. Use February, and Black History, as a starting point for creating a calendar that celebrates a culturally diverse workforce. Here are some ideas to get you started.
At the end of the day, your diversity and inclusion efforts to make the work environment a better place while encouraging ideas and feedback between employees and leadership will help with collaboration and engagement. Your employees should feel safe to talk about their ideas, experiences and cultural background.
For more free resources and tools that promote DE&I best practices in the workplace, visit Perspectives+. It’s Paycor’s online knowledge library designed to help our partner network drive change, empower colleagues, and foster new leaders.
 Previous:
Next:
Stay up to date with the latest HR trends

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Employee satisfaction surveys are a great way to stay in tune with what your employees are thinking. Get real insights on how to engage and motivate your team.

        Article      
Read Time: 10 min
Employee burnout can impact work quality and morale. Discover the warning signs for burnout and how to prevent it in your workplace.

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Being an effective leader requires more than just technical knowledge. Create an environment where everyone can thrive and understand emotions in oneself and others.
HCM Software
HR + Payroll Software
Talent Management
Workforce Management
Employee Experience
Benefits Administration
Quick Links
Services + Support
855-565-3285
Talk to Sales
855-752-8564
© 2023 Paycor, Inc  |  Refer Paycor  |  Privacy Policy  |  1-800-501-9462 |
*Represents approximately 30,000 corporate clients covering 40,000 businesses employing people