How ATS Software Makes Recruiting Easier

Stop waisting time with manual recruiting processes. Gain efficiencies with ATS software and start improving your workflows.

Talent Management
Last Updated:  April 2, 2018 | Read Time: 7 min
Applicant Tracking System (ATS) software is a time saving tool that assists recruiting professionals with all aspects of the hiring process by improving efficiency and data management. ATS software provides a single location where everything related to candidate tracking — from interview to job offer — can be maintained and easily accessed. Recruiting teams look for well-regarded systems that offer the features they need to improve outcomes and streamline efficiency. Ideally, products built by recruiters who understand the challenges unique to their industry will produce a better product designed with the end user in mind. Software with minimal setup time and dependable technical support makes a product more appealing to decision makers.
The right applicant tracking system gives HR Managers, Directors, and Recruiters the freedom to focus on finding the ideal candidate instead of wasting hours struggling with poorly designed technology. Utilizing ATS software can provide solutions to many of the challenges recruiters regularly encounter.
Hiring managers are witnessing a considerable decrease in applicant numbers. The best applicant tracking system addresses the underlying reasons for this by improving the candidate experience.

Complicated, time-consuming applications account for many lost candidates. Job-seekers simply don’t want to fill out lengthy applications on systems that require a significant investment of time. More than 40% of candidates are accessing postings from mobile devices, giving products that can accommodate those users an advantage. Another important factor to consider is serving the 41 million Spanish-speaking Americans who are unable to apply if applications are English-only.
Have you noticed how some applicant tracking software systems seem to be designed for people who love complex configurations that take forever to set up and months to master? It doesn’t have to be that way.
ATS should consider the needs of the end user, offer functionality that streamlines the process, and makes the job of the recruiter easier. A central dashboard that simplifies navigation, for example, is a great tracking system feature. Finding candidate names, resumes, and job status all from one place allows recruiters access to the information they need when they need it. Integration with social media, HRIS and Payroll systems, and background screening providers is another strong indicator the product offers the kinds of features a recruiter really needs.
Hiring managers don’t want to miss out on what might have been the perfect hire, but when workflow is inconsistent, qualified candidates who are waiting to be contacted can get lost in the system.
Finding software that offers an intuitive workflow makes all the difference. By eliminating the guesswork, recruiters can get up and running quickly, using tools and features built to save time and improve workflow. Features like taking a quick action without logging in might make a product stand out. Any system you choose should let you spend more time finding, attracting, and retaining candidates, and less time clicking around to figure out where important features might be hiding.
ATS can save you time and money on job postings if it allows you to search your existing candidate database. Look for features like filters and powerful search capabilities that will help you leverage the data you already have.
Candidates in your database have an interest in your company and may be the right choice at a different time. Neglecting that resource is often a missed opportunity. To prevent this, look for a software product that offers a variety of tagging options like location, previous offers, job title, and job status.

Sometimes the ability to assess where there might be hiccups in the hiring process leads to valuable problem-solving.
Capturing real-time analytics and aggregating that information so it’s useful is an important feature in applicant tracking software. Real-time reporting offers you the ability to view metrics and gain insight into what’s working and what isn’t, so you and your team can make the right adjustments and improve results. Knowing which postings are delivering the most candidates, troubleshooting issues, analyzing trends, and monitoring compliance are important data points that inform real-time decision-making.
Selecting the Right Tracking System
Recruiters have a lot of data to manage and are constantly juggling a million tasks. Companies know their success relies on finding and keeping the best people. Supporting the needs of a busy recruiting department is the reason so many companies readily invest in ATS software.
As you’re considering solutions, keep in mind which features are most vital to you and your team. Think about what you need now, and what you might need in the future so the product you select can be a long-term solution. When you begin comparing ATS, it helps to start by narrowing down the options:
Key Features to Consider:
Once you have a list of products that offer these key features you can dive deeper and evaluate which ATS recruiting tool best suits your needs. When you’re ready, you’ll be able to make an informed decision and select a great tracking system that will change the way you recruit.
Paycor’s Perform ATS is the simple, smart, safe recruiting platform designed by recruiting professionals to help you hire. Perform ATS will help reduce drop-off rates and allow you to capture more candidates throughout an optimized experience available on any device. Plus, intuitive workflows empower hiring managers to increase time to hire and powerful analytics and reporting help you see where your best candidates are coming so you can invest more time and resources in your most effective recruiting channels. It all adds up to a great experience for users and candidates that will help you attract top talent. To see Perform ATS in action, watch this short video on this page. Or if you’d like to learn how we can help you overcome your recruiting challenges, start a conversation here.
Enter your email below to receive a weekly recap of the latest articles
from Paycor’s Resource Center.


MktoForms2.loadForm("//app-ab01.marketo.com", "003-JWW-697", 1796);
Check your inbox
for an email confirming your subscription. Enjoy!
 Previous:
Next:
Stay up to date with the latest HR trends

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Employee satisfaction surveys are a great way to stay in tune with what your employees are thinking. Get real insights on how to engage and motivate your team.

        Article      
Read Time: 10 min
Employee burnout can impact work quality and morale. Discover the warning signs for burnout and how to prevent it in your workplace.

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Being an effective leader requires more than just technical knowledge. Create an environment where everyone can thrive and understand emotions in oneself and others.
HCM Software
HR + Payroll Software
Talent Management
Workforce Management
Employee Experience
Benefits Administration
Quick Links
Services + Support
855-565-3285
Talk to Sales
855-752-8564
© 2023 Paycor, Inc  |  Refer Paycor  |  Privacy Policy  |  1-800-501-9462 |
*Represents approximately 30,000 corporate clients covering 40,000 businesses employing people