How to Implement a Dress Code in the Workplace

Organizations considering implementing a dress code should be aware of the impacts, both positive and negative. Read how dress codes can impact your workplace.

Employee Experience
Last Updated:  October 22, 2019 | Read Time: 5 min
Your employees probably won’t be thrilled to hear that a dress code is coming. But if done right, they’ll be more likely to accept and adhere to it if you can provide a good reason for requiring a workplace dress code. Here’s a quick post to help you figure out how to put dress code requirements into action at your workplace.
If you don’t have a formal dress code, you’re not alone. You’ll find plenty of solid rationale for your company to put an employee dress code in place. Most companies that go the dress-code route do so because they want their employees who are customer-facing to look a little more pulled together. Implementing an easy-to-follow dress code can help improve customer perception and employee morale. A dress code governing business attire can bring a sense of consistency to the work environment as well.
First a few cons:
Now, the positives:
Workplace dress codes will typically vary depending on the part of the country you’re in, as well as how conservative the working environment is. Are you going for business casual or a smart casual dress code? Or are you requiring suits and ties? Keep in mind that simply saying your dress code is business casual won’t cut it. Different people will have varying interpretations as to what that term means so you want to be absolutely clear on what’s acceptable attire to wear to work and what’s not. The majority of employees will fall in line when it comes to workplace dress, but you’ll likely have one or two who wear clothes that aren’t appropriate. You’ll need to define consequences for not following the rules.
You should also address appropriate attire for off-site company events, such as trade shows or client meetings.
Generally, there are a few items that can be included or excluded in your dress code regardless of your company’s set up. Using imagery is often helpful to clarify exactly what you mean. For example:

Implementing formal dress codes might rub some employees the wrong way, so if you plan to institute one, make sure you’ve got it in writing in your employee handbook. It’s important that everyone understands what’s expected of them across the board. If you’re having difficulty figuring out exactly what to include, check out our post with a sample dress code policy here.

 Previous:
Next:
Stay up to date with the latest HR trends

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Employee satisfaction surveys are a great way to stay in tune with what your employees are thinking. Get real insights on how to engage and motivate your team.

        Article      
Read Time: 10 min
Employee burnout can impact work quality and morale. Discover the warning signs for burnout and how to prevent it in your workplace.

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Being an effective leader requires more than just technical knowledge. Create an environment where everyone can thrive and understand emotions in oneself and others.
HCM Software
HR + Payroll Software
Talent Management
Workforce Management
Employee Experience
Benefits Administration
Quick Links
Services + Support
855-565-3285
Talk to Sales
855-752-8564
© 2023 Paycor, Inc  |  Refer Paycor  |  Privacy Policy  |  1-800-501-9462 |
*Represents approximately 30,000 corporate clients covering 40,000 businesses employing people