Integrate Core Values into Your Performance Management Process

It's important that companies define their core values. But the bigger challenge is integrating these into your business. See how to do it, here.

Talent Management
Last Updated: May 25, 2021 | Read Time: 5 min
We all know defining a company’s core values is important, but it’s actually only the first step. The greater challenge is how to integrate these into the day-to-day life of your business. Core values provide a motivation to make a difference but also a standard by which employees’ performance is judged. For this reason, leaders must create a values-based performance management process.
If performance management simply means an annual appraisal, you’re doing it wrong. You aren’t going to implement core values through a traditional form filling performance review. Employees hate it and managers do too. But performance management doesn’t need to be this way. Here’s the thing: any process you use to enhance employee performance and company culture is performance management.
Start by redefining your performance management processes as employee-oriented. Think about why you care about performance in the first place. You want to set employees up for success so that they can contribute to making your whole organization a success.
To make this a reality, it’s a manager’s job to provide employees with support and guidance on how they can achieve the expectations set by the company. Managers should communicate how these expectations fit in with your company’s core values.
Initiating a values-based performance management cycle takes work. These steps for an effective performance management process will help:
If you follow all these best practices, you’ll be well on your way to establishing a values-based performance management process.
Paycor creates HR software for leaders who want to make a difference. Our Human Capital Management (HCM) platform modernizes every aspect of people management, from the way you recruit, onboard and develop people, to the way you pay and retain them.
 Previous:
Next:
Stay up to date with the latest HR trends

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Employee satisfaction surveys are a great way to stay in tune with what your employees are thinking. Get real insights on how to engage and motivate your team.

        Article      
Read Time: 10 min
Employee burnout can impact work quality and morale. Discover the warning signs for burnout and how to prevent it in your workplace.

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Being an effective leader requires more than just technical knowledge. Create an environment where everyone can thrive and understand emotions in oneself and others.
HCM Software
HR + Payroll Software
Talent Management
Workforce Management
Employee Experience
Benefits Administration
Quick Links
Services + Support
855-565-3285
Talk to Sales
855-752-8564
© 2023 Paycor, Inc  |  Refer Paycor  |  Privacy Policy  |  1-800-501-9462 |
*Represents approximately 30,000 corporate clients covering 40,000 businesses employing people