5 Questions to Ask Before Implementing a New Payroll and HR System

Thinking about switching HR and payroll companies? Make sure you ask these five questions before implementation.

Workforce Management
Last Updated:  July 22, 2020 | Read Time: 3 min
Many business leaders feel stuck with subpar HCM technology because they’re terrified of the implementation process. If you’re one of them, get over your fear by asking tough questions. Implementation doesn’t have to be hard or risky, IF you can find an HCM provider who can answer these 5 questions.
Research shows that 70% of implementations fail because they aren’t tailored to a business’s specific needs. While other providers take employee data, add it to the system and fix any problems later, Paycor focuses on accuracy, efficiency and understanding your specific needs. Throughout the implementation process, our team works behind the scenes to configure your database while you receive targeted training to help you get the most out of your Paycor solutions.
 Previous:
Next:
Stay up to date with the latest HR trends

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Employee satisfaction surveys are a great way to stay in tune with what your employees are thinking. Get real insights on how to engage and motivate your team.

        Article      
Read Time: 10 min
Employee burnout can impact work quality and morale. Discover the warning signs for burnout and how to prevent it in your workplace.

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Being an effective leader requires more than just technical knowledge. Create an environment where everyone can thrive and understand emotions in oneself and others.
HCM Software
HR + Payroll Software
Talent Management
Workforce Management
Employee Experience
Benefits Administration
Quick Links
Services + Support
855-565-3285
Talk to Sales
855-752-8564
© 2023 Paycor, Inc  |  Refer Paycor  |  Privacy Policy  |  1-800-501-9462 |
*Represents approximately 30,000 corporate clients covering 40,000 businesses employing people