Remote Employee Reimbursement Rules by State

Remote work is here to stay. Businesses need to be aware of the Federal and State reimbursement laws for remote employees. Get the regulations, here.

Workforce Management
Last Updated: July 13, 2021 | Read Time: 12 min
In April 2020, an incredibly 70% of the US workforce was operating remotely. More than a year on, businesses across the country have taken the opportunity to re-examine their working arrangements. For some, it was just temporary, but many companies will never go back to how they were before.
Remote-first organizations can make big savings on real estate—but are they required to instead pay for remote employees’ expenses? When employees work from home, they use their won electricity, internet and (often) office supplies. What portion of these expenses are, or should be, reimbursable?
Federal law states that an employer only needs to reimburse their employees for work-related expenses that drop their earnings below the minimum wage. However, ten states (and Washington D.C.) currently have laws requiring employers to reimburse employees for certain remote work expenses: California, Washington D.C., Illinois, Iowa, Massachusetts, Minnesota, Montana, Hampshire, New York, North Dakota, Pennsylvania, and South Dakota. To help employers, we’ve put together a chart listing states with remote employee reimbursement laws and what expenses must be reimbursed.
The big question for businesses in these states is which expenses will count as essential. The reality is, it’s open to interpretation. Generally, businesses aren’t required to pay expenses when workers choose to work remotely. If remote work is mandated, however, a variety of different costs may need to be reimbursed.
A necessary expense is anything required for the performance of an employees’ job. This depends on the work performed, but reasonable reimbursable expenses will likely include: internet services, mobile data usage, laptop computers or tablets, and equipment such as copiers and printers. In the most employee-friendly state, California, employers may even be required to pay a portion of home utilities, such as air conditioning.
Even if your state does not mandate reimbursement, experts recommend offering some type of reimbursement policy because it helps build loyalty and morale among your employees.
In this case, it is also recommended that you develop general guidelines around reimbursement to avoid confusion or unequal application. Specifically, you should identify what is considered a necessary expense to be reimbursed and what is not.
It’s also important to determine your state’s tax rules regarding reimbursements and how they will impact your company’s and your employees’ taxes. Determining if you will need to pay taxes on expense reimbursements depends on whether you use an accountable or nonaccountable plan.
In order to qualify for an accountable plan, the employer’s reimbursement or allowance arrangement must follow all three of these rules:
Since accountable plan reimbursements aren’t considered wages, they aren’t subject to taxation and are also deductible by the employer as business expenses.
If any of these conditions are not met, the reimbursements are treated as supplemental wages, subject to applicable taxes and will also need to be reported on the employee’s W-2 form.
A nonaccountable plan treats any reimbursement or other allowance arrangement as supplemental wages and subject to taxes. Reimbursements are considered nonaccountable if:
The IRS Publication 15 and Publication 535 have more details about the tax implications of business expenses and reimbursements.
Paycor is not a legal, tax, benefit, accounting or investment advisor. All communication from Paycor should be confirmed by your company’s legal, tax, benefit, accounting or investment advisor before making any decisions.
Paycor builds HR solutions for leaders. With Paycor, you can modernize every aspect of people management, from the way you recruit, onboard and develop your team, to the way you pay and retain them. See how Paycor can help the leaders of your organization solve the problems of today and tomorrow.
 Previous:
Next:
Stay up to date with the latest HR trends

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Employee satisfaction surveys are a great way to stay in tune with what your employees are thinking. Get real insights on how to engage and motivate your team.

        Article      
Read Time: 10 min
Employee burnout can impact work quality and morale. Discover the warning signs for burnout and how to prevent it in your workplace.

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Being an effective leader requires more than just technical knowledge. Create an environment where everyone can thrive and understand emotions in oneself and others.
HCM Software
HR + Payroll Software
Talent Management
Workforce Management
Employee Experience
Benefits Administration
Quick Links
Services + Support
855-565-3285
Talk to Sales
855-752-8564
© 2023 Paycor, Inc  |  Refer Paycor  |  Privacy Policy  |  1-800-501-9462 |
*Represents approximately 30,000 corporate clients covering 40,000 businesses employing people