Final Paycheck Laws by State 2023

When it comes to issuing a final paycheck, employer responsibilities differ from state to state. See the overview of final paycheck laws here.

Workforce Management
Last Updated: January 31, 2023 | Read Time: 12 min
The difference between whether an employee quits or is fired can have a big impact on how much money is due to them at the end of the employment relationship, which is why it’s vital for the employer to know the legal requirements for final paychecks in each state.For example, California’s final paycheck law requires payment of wages within 72 hours or immediately if the employee gave at least 72 hours’ notice. If the employee is discharged in California, then the law requires all employers to provide any and all compensation due at the time of separation. The employee can file a wage claim for every day they don’t receive a check after the time of separation.
Regardless, the final check should contain the employee’s regular pay from the most recent pay period along with any additional types of compensation such as accrued PTO or a bonus if your state law and/or company policy requires it.
With so many state laws pertaining to when an employee’s final paycheck must be given, it can get tricky for employers. This chart breaks down the varying timelines in each U.S. state outlining when a final paycheck must be delivered. We will keep this table regularly updated, but be sure to double-check with your state’s department of labor in case the laws have changed.
Even if you fire an employee, you cannot withhold unpaid wages due, nor can you make a final paycheck conditional. Failure to follow your state’s final paycheck laws can lead to penalties and fines if the employee takes legal action.
While there is no federal law that requires employers to pay in a timely fashion; employees who quit, are laid off, or fired, many states have their own wage payment and collections acts.
Some states have no law that requires a business to provide final wages in a certain timeframe, but most states do. The issue of payment of wages depends on whether the employee quit or was involuntarily terminated. The most widely followed procedure is for wages to be mailed or sent by direct deposit by the next scheduled payday, or immediately upon termination.
Employees can receive their final pay anywhere from immediately to the next scheduled payday depending on the state and situation.
Staying up to date on compliance rules can be cumbersome. Compliance management is more important than ever, and Paycor can help.
For more inspiration and best practices on compliance management, visit our HR compliance solutions site. 
Paycor is not a legal, tax, benefit, accounting, or investment advisor. All communication from Paycor should be confirmed by your company’s legal, tax, benefit, accounting, or investment advisor before making any decisions.
 Previous:
Next:
Stay up to date with the latest HR trends

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Employee satisfaction surveys are a great way to stay in tune with what your employees are thinking. Get real insights on how to engage and motivate your team.

        Article      
Read Time: 10 min
Employee burnout can impact work quality and morale. Discover the warning signs for burnout and how to prevent it in your workplace.

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Being an effective leader requires more than just technical knowledge. Create an environment where everyone can thrive and understand emotions in oneself and others.
HCM Software
HR + Payroll Software
Talent Management
Workforce Management
Employee Experience
Benefits Administration
Quick Links
Services + Support
855-565-3285
Talk to Sales
855-752-8564
© 2023 Paycor, Inc  |  Refer Paycor  |  Privacy Policy  |  1-800-501-9462 |
*Represents approximately 30,000 corporate clients covering 40,000 businesses employing people