5 Recruitment Trends to Follow in 2022

Recruiting top talent is more competitive than ever. To help HR teams stay ahead of the game, here are our top 5 recruitment trends for 2022.

Employee Experience
Last Updated: February 28, 2022 | Read Time: 5 min
Now that recruiting is more competitive than ever before, potential hires have the power to reject workplace norms; even when it comes to the recruitment process. To find and attract top talent, employers are experimenting with new recruiting methods and developing a proactive approach to hiring.
Let’s start with a quick definition. Recruitment marketing is the strategic and tactical implementations that allow a company to find, attract and engage job seekers, encouraging more qualified candidates.
HR leaders often mistake recruitment marketing as top of funnel activity, but in reality, it’s pre-funnel. Whether you’re a hiring manager or recruiter, it’s important to think big and attract as many potential candidates to your careers page as possible.
A well-structured pipeline can:
Pipelines ensures you always have access to a network of top talent, making the recruiting process easier and faster while achieving better results.
Finding talent through social media is very cost-effective, making it a top recruiting trend for many HR professionals.
Because with boomerang hires:
To maintain communication with ex top talent, consider developing alumni networks.
Internal movement is also a great way to cut down employee turnover. If an employee is high-risk for jumping ship, consider finding them a new challenge within your organization. When you match internal candidates with positions that fit their passions and skill sets, you may just get employees to stay for the long haul.
Looking for more thought leadership?
Check out Paycor’s On Demand HR Webinars page. These complimentary HR webinars are hosted by HR and finance experts to guide you through current trends and best practices on how to manage your business better.

 Previous:
Next:
Stay up to date with the latest HR trends

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Employee satisfaction surveys are a great way to stay in tune with what your employees are thinking. Get real insights on how to engage and motivate your team.

        Article      
Read Time: 10 min
Employee burnout can impact work quality and morale. Discover the warning signs for burnout and how to prevent it in your workplace.

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Being an effective leader requires more than just technical knowledge. Create an environment where everyone can thrive and understand emotions in oneself and others.
HCM Software
HR + Payroll Software
Talent Management
Workforce Management
Employee Experience
Benefits Administration
Quick Links
Services + Support
855-565-3285
Talk to Sales
855-752-8564
© 2023 Paycor, Inc  |  Refer Paycor  |  Privacy Policy  |  1-800-501-9462 |
*Represents approximately 30,000 corporate clients covering 40,000 businesses employing people