Key HR Challenges Facing Healthcare Providers

Organizations in the medical industry must address staffing shortages and regulation challenges.  A human capital management software can help, read how here!

Workforce Management
Last Updated: December 24, 2019 | Read Time: 7 min
With staff shortages, high turnover and complex regulations to maintain, HR professionals in the healthcare industry have an enormous undertaking. Healthcare has quickly become one of the most highly regulated industries in the entire country and maintaining compliance continues to be a top concern for many employers. That’s why it’s mission-critical that health and medical providers find a Human Capital Management (HCM) provider that understands and can support their challenges, including recruiting, onboarding, time tracking, HR, payroll, reporting and compliance needs. Only then can healthcare providers get back to the mission of providing high-quality care to their patients.

Staffing shortages continue to plague the healthcare industry. More than 90% of U.S. hospital executives have expressed concern, according to a 2017 survey conducted by The Economist Intelligence Unit. With a significant number of baby boomer nurses retiring and a decreasing supply of available nurses to support the growing demand, staffing shortage concerns will only continue to increase. And it’s not just a nursing shortage problem. Experts predict the next ten years will yield a deficiency of specialists, generalist physicians and other clinicians, which will hamper healthcare organizations’ ability to deliver high-quality care.
Healthcare positions such as physicians, nurses and medical assistants experience high turnover rates, with the greatest amount of turnover occurring during the first year of employment. In the past two years, Emergency Departments turned over an alarming 40% of their RN staff, according to staffing firm NSI Nursing Solutions, Inc. The Robert Wood Johnson Foundation reports that one in five nurses leaves their first nursing job within one year of hire.
This high turnover stems from several causes: According to healthcare management firm Leaders for Today, more than a quarter (27%) of respondents left their job for a promotion or a better opportunity for advancement. Another 14% left for better compensation. The largest number (58%) left for other reasons, such as long work hours, frustration, burnout and a lack of training and development.
Hospitals, medical practices and other healthcare providers must perform thorough background checks on potential employees. Since healthcare employees will be entrusted with the care of patients and with sensitive personal information, hiring organizations are most concerned about those who misrepresent themselves or use drugs.

The introduction of the Affordable Care Act (ACA) and continuous evolution of the regulations have created fear and anxiety for many healthcare providers. With a significant number of variable-hour employees on staff, healthcare providers are tasked with properly classifying employees and tracking their time worked to comply with ACA requirements. And for long-term care facilities, detailed compliance measures like payroll-based journal (PBJ) reporting closely scrutinizes the quality of care facilities are providing patients. But ACA compliance isn’t the only thing on healthcare providers’ minds. HIPPA compliance audits test their ability to protect patient information from data breaches, especially with the increase of mobile devices.
Instead of managing the changes alone, organizations have turned to reliable HCM software providers to minimize the potential risk associated with ACA, PBJ and other compliance regulations.
Healthcare organizations should have the proper tools to track certifications, as medical professionals have continuing education credits they must renew every year. To reduce risk and liability, it’s crucial to have an easy system to track and report on each employee’s certifications and license expiration dates.
Workplace training focused on health and safety is important in all organizations, but arguably the most important in the healthcare industry. In workplaces with complex and potentially dangerous equipment, such as scalpels, syringes and X-ray machines, proper training is vital to keep employees and patients safe. It’s also critical to track and have proof of that training to protect the organization from liability.
Healthcare organizations often have different rates of pay for different types of employees: physicians, RNs, medical assistants, lab technicians, and so on. As such, organizations need to be able to easily keep track of and automate of these differentials and ensure each employee is being paid correctly.
Nurses and other medical professionals tend to have strong unions. A highly unionized workforce presents certain human resources and payroll challenges:
With staffing shortages, the task of managing employee certifications and compliance regulations and the intricacies of employee compensation, it’s easy for health care organizations to get overwhelmed. Nearly 6,000 healthcare providers depend on Paycor for solutions regarding employee turnover, compliance and the nursing shortage. Why? Because we understand the top challenges in your industry and want to give you the tools to help you shorten the time to fill open positions, strengthen your candidate pipeline, track training programs and more.
Here are just some of the ways Paycor’s solutions can help:
Get in touch with a Paycor representative to learn more about how our solutions can help healthcare organizations reduce time, and resource-consuming administrative duties, enabling you to focus more on the patients you serve.
*Sources: American Association of Colleges of Nursing, Memphis Business Journal
 Previous:
Next:
Stay up to date with the latest HR trends

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Employee satisfaction surveys are a great way to stay in tune with what your employees are thinking. Get real insights on how to engage and motivate your team.

        Article      
Read Time: 10 min
Employee burnout can impact work quality and morale. Discover the warning signs for burnout and how to prevent it in your workplace.

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Being an effective leader requires more than just technical knowledge. Create an environment where everyone can thrive and understand emotions in oneself and others.
HCM Software
HR + Payroll Software
Talent Management
Workforce Management
Employee Experience
Benefits Administration
Quick Links
Services + Support
855-565-3285
Talk to Sales
855-752-8564
© 2023 Paycor, Inc  |  Refer Paycor  |  Privacy Policy  |  1-800-501-9462 |
*Represents approximately 30,000 corporate clients covering 40,000 businesses employing people