Can Hours Be Reduced As Discipline?

Discipline policies and enforcement continue to be hot-button topics for many HR departments.

Employee Experience
Last Updated: September 9, 2016 | Read Time: 3 min
Discipline policies and enforcement continue to be hot-button topics for
many HR departments. The professionals at HR Support Center often
encounter questions from employers about disciplinary techniques and
best practices and are skilled at handling all types of situations,
including this topic.
Question:
Can we reduce an employee’s hours as a disciplinary measure?
Answer:
We do not recommend reducing hours as a disciplinary measure, as it does
not directly address the performance or behavioral issue that the
employee is having. Unless reducing hours is already a common practice
in your workplace, it could be challenged on the basis of fairness,
consistency with your policy, or discrimination. For example, if no
other employees have had a reduction in hours for disciplinary reasons,
this employee could claim they’re being unfairly targeted and that the
discipline was actually a result of their inclusion in a protected class
(e.g., if the employee is over 40 years old or practices a particular
religion).
Instead, we advise that you follow a progressive disciplinary process
and put the employee on a performance improvement plan (PIP), addressing
poor performance and behavioral issues as soon as they arise. In this
case, we recommend that you meet with the employee to discuss the
performance and behavioral problems, and document your expectations
going forward. Treating the employee consistently with your policy and
documenting the steps of the disciplinary/PIP process will be useful if
any of your decisions are later challenged by an employee claim.
This content came from a team of HR professionals at HR Support Center.
Organizations like yours can pay a yearly fee for HR Support Center and
receive awesome subscription perks like these:
• Legal advice
• Employee handbook help (creating a new one or updating an existing
one)
• Custom HR forms, letters, tools, and other documents
• Tons of Q&A
• News on government activity that could affect you
• Training on common HR activities like hiring
• Thought leadership articles
The list goes on. HR Support

Center
is not only feature rich, it’s inexpensive: one entire year of HR
Support Center is cheaper than one hour of a typical attorney’s time.
Don’t ignore the HR side of your organization. Contact

us
today to see how we can help.
Enter your email below to receive a weekly recap of the latest articles
from Paycor’s Resource Center.


MktoForms2.loadForm("//app-ab01.marketo.com", "003-JWW-697", 1796);
Check your inbox

for an email confirming your subscription. Enjoy!
 Previous:
Next:
Stay up to date with the latest HR trends

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Employee satisfaction surveys are a great way to stay in tune with what your employees are thinking. Get real insights on how to engage and motivate your team.

        Article      
Read Time: 10 min
Employee burnout can impact work quality and morale. Discover the warning signs for burnout and how to prevent it in your workplace.

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Being an effective leader requires more than just technical knowledge. Create an environment where everyone can thrive and understand emotions in oneself and others.
HCM Software
HR + Payroll Software
Talent Management
Workforce Management
Employee Experience
Benefits Administration
Quick Links
Services + Support
855-565-3285
Talk to Sales
855-752-8564
© 2023 Paycor, Inc  |  Refer Paycor  |  Privacy Policy  |  1-800-501-9462 |
*Represents approximately 30,000 corporate clients covering 40,000 businesses employing people