Legal Age to Work by State, See the Regulations

Many businesses rely on younger employees. States have different rules on the age minors can be employed and hours per week they can work. See details here.

Workforce Management
Last Updated: June 10, 2021 | Read Time: 12 min
Many businesses rely on younger employees. These workers, often teenagers, fill a variety of key roles while building essential skills as they join the workforce. But businesses should be aware of both the FSLA (Fair Labor Standards Act) rules and their state’s laws whenever employing people under 18 years old.
Here are some highlights:
The table below summarizes state rules for minors age 14-16. In general, minors 16-18 years old have no restriction in the number of hours they can work, but cannot work hazardous jobs. Always check your state and local rules to get details and any updates.
Paycor builds HR solutions for leaders. With Paycor, you can modernize every aspect of people management, from the way you recruit, onboard and develop your team, to the way you pay and retain them. See how Paycor can help the leaders of your organization solve the problems of today and tomorrow.
 Previous:
Next:
Stay up to date with the latest HR trends

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Employee satisfaction surveys are a great way to stay in tune with what your employees are thinking. Get real insights on how to engage and motivate your team.

        Article      
Read Time: 10 min
Employee burnout can impact work quality and morale. Discover the warning signs for burnout and how to prevent it in your workplace.

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Being an effective leader requires more than just technical knowledge. Create an environment where everyone can thrive and understand emotions in oneself and others.
HCM Software
HR + Payroll Software
Talent Management
Workforce Management
Employee Experience
Benefits Administration
Quick Links
Services + Support
855-565-3285
Talk to Sales
855-752-8564
© 2023 Paycor, Inc  |  Refer Paycor  |  Privacy Policy  |  1-800-501-9462 |
*Represents approximately 30,000 corporate clients covering 40,000 businesses employing people