How Can HR Software Benefit Your Company?

Learn seven ways HR software can benefit your company. From increased efficiency to better performance management, an HRIS can help you.

Workforce Management
Last Updated:  March 2, 2015 | Read Time: 4 min
HR software can help companies to improve talent management systems,
better manage employee records, and optimize hiring practices. Many
companies across all industries and geographical locations have already
made the leap into automating HR systems. For those that have not yet
made the leap, the following are several ways that HR software may be
beneficial to your company.
One thing that HR systems are virtually guaranteed to do is save
companies space. Eliminating or minimizing paper records removes the
need for extensive filing systems and large storage areas, which can in
turn save your company money on rent and utilities.
When records are kept in an automated system, it becomes much easier
to organize and recall needed information. The degree to which HR
systems may help improve organization depends on your company’s existing
systems and the features of the software.
HR systems can make it possible for employers or managers to share
information across an entire organization with one click. If employee
self-service options are in place, this information may be accessed from
anywhere at any time. This can eliminate inconsistencies when sharing
information regarding procedural changes and other company news.
For companies that operate across the globe, an HR system can help
employees and managers to communicate from remote locations and attend
conferences online. Depending on the industry, it may be possible to
communicate completely online and hire skilled employees without ever
needing to travel or have the employee relocate. HR software can also
help to establish greater consistency in systems and standards when
there are numerous company locations across a large geographical area.
With the help of analytics and data reporting, managers can optimize
decision making in many areas. HR systems can help managers determine
when and who to hire and what the best methods will be for employee
development. HR systems may also be able to help managers determine how
to increase productivity and improve systems, though this requires
analysis skills as well as access to information.
HR software makes HR professionals’ jobs much more efficient. HR
personnel does not have to spend time writing out and filing employee
information and searching through files to answer questions or make
changes. With information easy to enter and available in one place, HR
professionals have more time to devote to endeavors that will truly
benefit the organization.
Performance management can be altered from a once-a-year grueling review
process to a daily or weekly feedback session in which managers truly
find out how an employee is progressing and use the information to
effectively develop the employee. HR systems make it easy to obtain
performance feedback from a variety of sources so that a more realistic
and rounded view of the employee is seen. With this information,
managers can more effectively develop employees by giving specific
advice and suggesting training systems that will be of the greatest
benefit.
About the author
Dave Rietsema has worked in the human resources field for nearly 10
years in multiple roles—from HR Generalist to VP of Human Resources. He
holds an MBA with an HR focus and earned a PHR certificate from HRCI in
2012.
Dave is the Founder & CEO of HR Payroll
Systems and HRIS Payroll
Software, websites that help HR
professionals in identifying, evaluating and selecting HR and payroll
software solutions.
 Previous:
Next:
Stay up to date with the latest HR trends

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Employee satisfaction surveys are a great way to stay in tune with what your employees are thinking. Get real insights on how to engage and motivate your team.

        Article      
Read Time: 10 min
Employee burnout can impact work quality and morale. Discover the warning signs for burnout and how to prevent it in your workplace.

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Being an effective leader requires more than just technical knowledge. Create an environment where everyone can thrive and understand emotions in oneself and others.
HCM Software
HR + Payroll Software
Talent Management
Workforce Management
Employee Experience
Benefits Administration
Quick Links
Services + Support
855-565-3285
Talk to Sales
855-752-8564
© 2023 Paycor, Inc  |  Refer Paycor  |  Privacy Policy  |  1-800-501-9462 |
*Represents approximately 30,000 corporate clients covering 40,000 businesses employing people