The Impact of Hiring Contingent Workers

There are pros and cons to hiring a contingent workforce. Take a look at the true impact to organizations, here.

Talent Management
Last Updated:  September 11, 2018 | Read Time: 5 min
Economic times continue to be challenging, and employers are faced with determining new ways to manage their workloads, their workforces and their labor costs. With the gig economy in play, more and more companies are looking to hire freelancers, consultants or other types of outsourced workers to share the load and reduce the cost of doing business, such as skyrocketing health care premiums.
Organizations such as Macy’s, JC Penny and many other retailers have taken advantage of contingent workers during the seasonal holidays for decades, and it’s paid off big time for their bottom lines. However, in order to know whether this strategy is advantageous to your businesses you must first understand both the positives and the negatives of hiring contingent workers.
Let’s take a look at some of the advantages and disadvantages:

If you currently hire contingent workers or are considering this option, employers need to fully understand the impact and costs of contracted work. After all, the goal of hiring contingent workers is to cut down on labor costs, so analyze this strategy before pulling the trigger. For organizations that go forward, understand that you should develop policies for contingent workers that outline expectations as you would for any newly hired employee. Without this, you’re setting up contracted employees for immediate failure within your company.
No matter the type of employee you’re hiring, you need a trusted HR and payroll partner to support you along the way. For nearly 30 years, Paycor has maintained a core expertise in payroll, tax filing and compliance. We established our expertise in the Cincinnati tri-state area, one of the most complex tax jurisdictions in the country, so we’re able to handle payroll and tax complexities in a way our competitors can’t. Contact our team to learn how we can support your business.
Enter your email below to receive a weekly recap of the latest articles
from Paycor’s Resource Center.


MktoForms2.loadForm("//app-ab01.marketo.com", "003-JWW-697", 1796);
Check your inbox
for an email confirming your subscription. Enjoy!
 Previous:
Next:
Stay up to date with the latest HR trends

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Employee satisfaction surveys are a great way to stay in tune with what your employees are thinking. Get real insights on how to engage and motivate your team.

        Article      
Read Time: 10 min
Employee burnout can impact work quality and morale. Discover the warning signs for burnout and how to prevent it in your workplace.

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Being an effective leader requires more than just technical knowledge. Create an environment where everyone can thrive and understand emotions in oneself and others.
HCM Software
HR + Payroll Software
Talent Management
Workforce Management
Employee Experience
Benefits Administration
Quick Links
Services + Support
855-565-3285
Talk to Sales
855-752-8564
© 2023 Paycor, Inc  |  Refer Paycor  |  Privacy Policy  |  1-800-501-9462 |
*Represents approximately 30,000 corporate clients covering 40,000 businesses employing people