4 Steps to Effective Change Management for HR

Learn four steps to effective change management from Paycor's Stacey Browning

Employee Experience
Last Updated:  May 3, 2015 | Read Time: 6 min
Reprinted from TLNT.com
No matter the size of the organization, change is one of life’s constants in today’s business environment. With all that change going on, everyone must be an expert on managing change effectively — right?
Wrong.
Most changes in organizations fail, due in part to employee resistance, failure to adequately prepare and miscommunication. Research shows that change initiatives are nearly twice as likely to fail as a result of organizational resistance rather than technical or operational issues.
Needed: a systemic, proactive approach
If change is not implemented correctly, the results can range from inconvenient to disastrous, such as inefficiencies, duplicated efforts, and lost business opportunities. Companies that are able to manage change effectively can gain distinct advantages over their competition that can lead to even greater success. When done right, change management can alleviate uncertainty among employees about how the change might impact them, reduce the potential for a negative impact on productivity, and engage or re-engage the company’s workforce.
Companies who want to successfully lead employees through adoption of an organizational change must follow a systematic, proactive approach that incorporates four primary steps: overcoming resistance, engaging employees, implementing change in phases and communicating the change.
1. Overcoming resistance
Although employee resistance is a natural reaction to widespread organizational changes, you can overcome that resistance by focusing on several key strategies:
2. Engaging employees
Employees who are engaged in the change are more likely to put in the effort necessary to help implement the change and ensure a positive outcome for the organization. Help create high levels of employee engagement during your change process by:
3. Implementing change in phases
For companies planning a major change initiative, taking a phased approach can help ensure that the transition to a new system or process is as smooth and seamless as possible. Leading change management firm Prosci recommends three phases:
4. Communicating change
Failing to tell employees in advance about organizational changes can increase employee misconduct by 42 percent.
An integral part of every stage of the change management process, communication must be a two-way street in order to ensure the success of the organizational change. Think quality over quantity when it comes to communicating with employees, and consider these communication strategies for successful implementation:
Building a foundation for success
Although implementing organizational change is complicated and complex, it does not have to negatively affect your company’s performance. You can minimize the disruption to your organization by beginning the planning and communication process early to build the foundation for a successful implementation.
by Stacey M. Browning, former Executive Vice President, Paycor
 Previous:
Next:
Stay up to date with the latest HR trends

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Employee satisfaction surveys are a great way to stay in tune with what your employees are thinking. Get real insights on how to engage and motivate your team.

        Article      
Read Time: 10 min
Employee burnout can impact work quality and morale. Discover the warning signs for burnout and how to prevent it in your workplace.

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Being an effective leader requires more than just technical knowledge. Create an environment where everyone can thrive and understand emotions in oneself and others.
HCM Software
HR + Payroll Software
Talent Management
Workforce Management
Employee Experience
Benefits Administration
Quick Links
Services + Support
855-565-3285
Talk to Sales
855-752-8564
© 2023 Paycor, Inc  |  Refer Paycor  |  Privacy Policy  |  1-800-501-9462 |
*Represents approximately 30,000 corporate clients covering 40,000 businesses employing people