8 Reasons You Should Have a Company Employee Handbook

Creating an employee handbook can provide consistency for employees and keep organizations out of hot water. Get started on creating you handbook!

Talent Management
Last Updated:  December 14, 2021 | Read Time: 9 min
If you ever started to believe there was no purpose for an employee handbook, think again. They are an essential tool for HR leaders and it’s not just about setting policy and staying compliant. The best employee handbooks offer a reminder of a company’s vision and purpose and help employees throughout their tenure. An employee handbook or manual is also a great opportunity to introduce new employees to your company’s culture.
Here’s everything you need to know about creating a strong employee handbook for your organization.
An employee handbook or employee manual gives employees a detailed overview of policies that are specific to your organization along with other key procedures, guidelines and employee benefits. In a nutshell, it sets clear expectations for your employees while also stating your legal obligations and defining employee rights. The employee handbook can help protect your business against employee lawsuits and claims, such as wrongful termination, harassment and discrimination. The handbook is also a crucial introduction to your business for new hires, providing insights for new hires to understand your mission and values.
Creating an employee handbook from scratch can seem like a daunting task, but having one is essential to creating transparency and consistency across your organization. It can also keep you out of hot water. Still on the fence? 
Here are eight reasons your organization should have one:
Introduces employees to your culture, mission and valuesPerhaps the most important aspect of your employee handbook is the introduction of new employees to your company culture and how they will fit in. This helps to foster a sense of pride and belonging, which studies show will help employees become more productive in a shorter period of time. The introduction section also includes a vision and mission statement. It also sets the standard for the employment relationship in general, and provides a guidepost for the remaining policies communicated in the handbook.
When was the last time you reviewed your policies and updated your employee handbook? Or do you need help creating an employee manual but aren’t sure where to start? The information above is enough to get you going; but if you are looking for a quick summary, here are a few items you should be sure to include in your staff handbook:
Remember, an employee handbook is a great opportunity to inform new employees, protect your organization and communicate your organization’s core values.
When it comes to trusted HR expertise, turn to Paycor for help. Paycor’s HR Support Center is a comprehensive HR resource that provides organizations access to employee handbook templates, sample job descriptions, useful checklists, law alerts and more. Plus, dedicated support from an HR expert is always available with HR Support Center On-Demand. Want an HR expert to review your handbook policies? Have questions regarding an employee’s behavior? The support you need is only one phone call away.
 Previous:
Next:
Stay up to date with the latest HR trends

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Employee satisfaction surveys are a great way to stay in tune with what your employees are thinking. Get real insights on how to engage and motivate your team.

        Article      
Read Time: 10 min
Employee burnout can impact work quality and morale. Discover the warning signs for burnout and how to prevent it in your workplace.

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Being an effective leader requires more than just technical knowledge. Create an environment where everyone can thrive and understand emotions in oneself and others.
HCM Software
HR + Payroll Software
Talent Management
Workforce Management
Employee Experience
Benefits Administration
Quick Links
Services + Support
855-565-3285
Talk to Sales
855-752-8564
© 2023 Paycor, Inc  |  Refer Paycor  |  Privacy Policy  |  1-800-501-9462 |
*Represents approximately 30,000 corporate clients covering 40,000 businesses employing people