Terminating Employee Checklist

If you need to terminate an employee, be sure you follow proper protocol. Get a FREE checklist here, to ensure it's managed properly.

Don’t miss steps when it comes to an involuntarily termination.
Download Your 
                                   Free Copy 

DOWNLOADS:  696 And Counting...!
Save Time Using Our Termination Checklist
Letting an employee go is never easy—but when it happens, no matter the root cause, companies have to act with professionalism and follow correct procedure. It’s the right thing to do, but it’s also essential for compliance. To help you make sure everything is done by the book, Paycor is providing a checklist of the right actions to take.
An involuntary termination can never be taken lightly, and before making the decision official you’ll want to confirm with your legal team or advisors that you’re following the right process. If the termination is the result of poor performance or disciplinary issues, the employee may well have been issued warnings of increasing severity and been aware they were at risk of losing their position.
Once the decision is made, it’s time to follow official company policy as well as state and federal law. Even if you’re eager to conclude things as quickly as possible, there’s no excuse for rushing things or skipping steps.
The employer’s tasks can be broken down into parts:
When conducing an involuntary separation, the first task facing businesses is preparing a final paycheck according to state requirements. You should also be aware of PTO payout laws by state. Your next job is to prepare any appropriate forms—this includes state unemployment forms, a termination letter and, if applicable, a severance agreement.
You will also need to contact any group insurance provider and, if necessary, a COBRA administrator.
Now comes the most important part: meeting with the employee. Here’s what not to do:
Instead, explain the decision clearly but concisely, without leaving room for misunderstanding. You’ll also need to inform the departing employee of:
The meeting is also the opportunity to collect any passwords and to request the return of company property. Afterwards, you’ll want to offer an opportunity for them to clear their desk and pick up belongings, before ensuring they are escorted out of the building.
The responsibilities do not end there. After an employee has departed, senior management, key team members and anyone with whom the employee worked must be informed. The IT department should also know, so that any relevant accounts can be deactivated.
You’ll then need to update your HRIS system and file all employee information under “terminated employees”. Lastly, you should keep detailed documentation of what was discussed at the severance meeting, in case the content of the discussion is later disputed.
It’s essential that businesses know exactly how to conduct an involuntary termination. To help you stay compliant, Paycor is providing a downloadable checklist of what to do.
NEXT:
NEXT: