Four Inclusionary Practices to Empower Investors

Traditionally underrepresented employees may end up saving less and retiring later. But it can be changed with these 4 steps.

Benefits Administration
Last Updated:  January 25, 2021 | Read Time: 3 min
Inclusion and equal treatment are top of mind for many Americans, as a quick scan of recent headlines will corroborate. Employers and financial services providers are in a position to help underrepresented communities stand on equal ground when it comes to one particularly consequential activity: saving for retirement.
Empower Retirement conducted a survey in conjunction with the Harris Poll of 2,014 U.S. citizens in an effort to better understand the mindsets of traditionally underrepresented groups and the impact these mindsets have on retirement saving. For the purposes of this article, traditionally underrepresented groups include Black, Hispanic, Asian, First-generation American, Second-generation American, multicultural household, multilingual household, interracial couple and female employees. All the data in this article is from this survey.
The survey revealed that many employees experience a sense of disconnection from the retirement and financial services industries. In fact, 72% of all respondents agreed with the statement that “retirement savings planning is not created equal for everyone.” In addition, 51% agreed that “retirement savings planning is a black box to me — that is, I don’t know what to do or how to do it,” and this is true for 60% of Hispanic men and women, 60% of Black men, and 61% of multicultural households, to call out a few. And these perceived inequalities are also realized inequalities when it comes to retirement savings. While the majority of Americans are saving for retirement, traditionally underrepresented groups lag their peers and women lag men across all groups.
Nearly 90% of all respondents surveyed with a workplace retirement plan have started saving for retirement, but what is more revealing is the percentage of respondents without a workplace retirement plan who have started saving. For example, 36% of men and 36% of white employees who do not have access to a plan have started saving for retirement compared to only 17% of Black employees. Add this to the fact that traditionally underrepresented groups do not have access to workplace retirement plans at the same rate, and it all adds up to less retirement savings. In addition, traditionally underrepresented employees tend to lag their counterparts when it comes to their income levels. It stands to reason that this disparity may impact the ability of lower-income employees to save for retirement.
The reality is that traditionally underrepresented employees may end up saving less and retiring later. But we can help change this. Here are some simple steps to get started.
Read more research like this by visiting the Empower Institute website.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Empower Retirement refers to the products and services offered by Great-West Life & Annuity Insurance Company and its subsidiaries.  ©2021 Empower Retirement, LLC. All rights reserved. GEN-885965-0121 RO1467889-0121
 Previous:
Next:
Stay up to date with the latest HR trends

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Employee satisfaction surveys are a great way to stay in tune with what your employees are thinking. Get real insights on how to engage and motivate your team.

        Article      
Read Time: 10 min
Employee burnout can impact work quality and morale. Discover the warning signs for burnout and how to prevent it in your workplace.

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Being an effective leader requires more than just technical knowledge. Create an environment where everyone can thrive and understand emotions in oneself and others.
HCM Software
HR + Payroll Software
Talent Management
Workforce Management
Employee Experience
Benefits Administration
Quick Links
Services + Support
855-565-3285
Talk to Sales
855-752-8564
© 2023 Paycor, Inc  |  Refer Paycor  |  Privacy Policy  |  1-800-501-9462 |
*Represents approximately 30,000 corporate clients covering 40,000 businesses employing people