The Business Case for Investing in Onboarding Programs

Why should your organization invest in new hire onboarding? Lack of onboarding has significant effects on the whole organization.

Employee Experience
Last Updated:  August 10, 2017 | Read Time: 3 min
Many companies treat onboarding as a two-hour orientation class for new hires, but that mind-set overlooks the importance of providing employees with a memorable start. In some cases, organizations treat onboarding as training, but there is a distinct difference. Onboarding is how you engage and nurture the relationship with a new employee.
As HR teams are focused on more strategic initiatives, HR leaders must communicate to the C-Suite why investing time and money in onboarding is a best practice for supporting bottom-line business goals through retention.
Here’s a look at the impact and importance of a thorough onboarding program.
What is onboarding?
Onboarding is the process of integrating new associates into an organization and providing them with the tools, resources and knowledge to quickly become engaged and productive. It starts with introducing a new hire to colleagues, providing a tour of the office, introducing policies and procedures and ensuring equipment is properly installed and ready for the new hire’s first day. This process actually begins well before—and extends much further beyond—mere orientation.
An effective onboarding program not only prepares an associate for his or her new role but also increases retention rates, productivity, employee engagement and performance.
The first 90 days on the job are critical to the success of new associates and to their commitment to an organization.
Powerful statistics
Why is onboarding so important? The numbers don’t lie.
An effective onboarding program not only prepares an employee for a new role, but also increases retention, productivity, engagement and performance.
In addition to the impact of losing one employee, turnover can affect the morale of other associates. As morale declines, so too does the quality of work and how they treat your customers, thus tying directly to retention and other business metrics that affect profitability.
The faster an associate understands the culture of your organization, the business operations and his or her specific role in meeting organizational goals, the more quickly the employee becomes engaged and productive.
As you review current practices and look to build on your current onboarding program, use this resource to create a great first impression for your new hires.
Sources: Fast Company, Forbes, HR Bartender, Impact Instruction, Interactive Services, UrbanBound
 Previous:
Next:
Stay up to date with the latest HR trends

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Employee satisfaction surveys are a great way to stay in tune with what your employees are thinking. Get real insights on how to engage and motivate your team.

        Article      
Read Time: 10 min
Employee burnout can impact work quality and morale. Discover the warning signs for burnout and how to prevent it in your workplace.

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Being an effective leader requires more than just technical knowledge. Create an environment where everyone can thrive and understand emotions in oneself and others.
HCM Software
HR + Payroll Software
Talent Management
Workforce Management
Employee Experience
Benefits Administration
Quick Links
Services + Support
855-565-3285
Talk to Sales
855-752-8564
© 2023 Paycor, Inc  |  Refer Paycor  |  Privacy Policy  |  1-800-501-9462 |
*Represents approximately 30,000 corporate clients covering 40,000 businesses employing people