3 Tips for Businesses to Avoid Payroll Tax Penalties in 2023

Businesses that aren't compliant with paying payroll taxes can face hefty fines. Learn how to AVOID payroll tax penalties!

Workforce Management
Last Updated: January 20, 2023 | Read Time: 8 min
Employment laws are getting more complex, often making it difficult to remain compliant. In 2021, the IRS collected nearly $7 billion from business that failed to meet their payroll tax obligations. Smaller businesses are at much greater risk of running afoul of the IRS because they tend to manage payroll through manual processes and disconnected software, leading to miscalculations, incorrect filings, and late withholdings deposits. If you’re a business leader who wants to stay on the IRS’s good side and avoid fines and penalties, here’s what you need to know.
State and federal taxes include:
There are no ifs, ands or buts: If you have unpaid payroll taxes, you will be penalized. Specifically, you’ll be fined a percentage of your gross payroll deposit based on the number of days your deposit is late.
Here are the penalties for not depositing your payroll taxes on-time:
Example: Sole proprietorship, Tim’s Software, Inc. has 100 employees and owes the IRS $39,000 for monthly payroll taxes. The company pays the full amount 10 days after the due date. Tim is slapped with a 5% penalty on the $39,000 deposit and now owes the IRS an additional $1,950. For smaller organizations, this type of fine can be a major setback. What if you can’t make the full deposit? Pay the taxes you can afford! Even a partial payroll tax payment will reduce the amount of penalties you’ll receive.
As an owner or partner, you can be held personally liable for willful failure to withhold employee pay and payroll taxes from federal and state agencies. This is called the Trust Fund Recovery Penalty and it’s one of the most severe penalties levied by the IRS.
Example: Let’s say you pay an employee $1,000. Their paystub notes that you withheld $90 for income tax plus $50 for Social Security and $10 for Medicare. But you didn’t send any of that money to the IRS. In this case, the unpaid tax bill is $150. Now you owe this amount plus that amount again as a penalty, doubling your bill. When you employ dozens of workers, this penalty can add up quickly.
Keep in mind these are also criminal penalties that can result in a $10,000 fine and/or imprisonment for up to five years. Here’s what you can do to make sure you stay on the right side of the law.
Paycor has spent more than 30 years perfecting payroll. Our solution is the easiest and most powerful solution on the market.
Learn more about the benefits of payroll software.
*This article does not contain legal advice. The information is provided for general educational purposes only and is not a substitute for legal advice.
 Previous:
Next:
Stay up to date with the latest HR trends

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Employee satisfaction surveys are a great way to stay in tune with what your employees are thinking. Get real insights on how to engage and motivate your team.

        Article      
Read Time: 10 min
Employee burnout can impact work quality and morale. Discover the warning signs for burnout and how to prevent it in your workplace.

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Being an effective leader requires more than just technical knowledge. Create an environment where everyone can thrive and understand emotions in oneself and others.
HCM Software
HR + Payroll Software
Talent Management
Workforce Management
Employee Experience
Benefits Administration
Quick Links
Services + Support
855-565-3285
Talk to Sales
855-752-8564
© 2023 Paycor, Inc  |  Refer Paycor  |  Privacy Policy  |  1-800-501-9462 |
*Represents approximately 30,000 corporate clients covering 40,000 businesses employing people