Why Your Small Business Needs a Payroll Service

As a small business owner you are busy. See why getting help with payroll could be the best decision for your business.

Workforce Management
Last Updated:  December 18, 2018 | Read Time: 6 min
As a small business owner, you have a tremendous number of “to-dos” on your plate. You know, all of those little things like building your brand and establishing relationships with customers. When processing payroll in-house is added to your list, time-consuming manual tasks unfortunately become a significant component of the “to-do” equation. You don’t have time for that, but your people still need to be paid. Instead of managing payroll on your own, you should be focused on growing your business and leave payroll processing and tax filing to the experts.
Let’s look at some of the benefits you can realize for your business and yourself if outsourcing your payroll is the right decision for you.
If you’re currently managing payroll in-house, you’re painfully familiar with the time and careful attention to every little detail it takes. And, as your company grows, the process becomes even more difficult. That’s time you could be spending growing your company. Making the decision to outsource payroll will almost instantly free up all those hours you were spending calculating time and making sure the appropriate deductions were withheld. 
Your time is valuable, so saving time is money in the bank. If you compare the amount of time you were spending running payroll every week to the cost of a small business payroll service, you should actually realize a cost savings. 
 
In-house payroll can also be extraordinarily risky, especially when you consider all of the employee data you maintain: Full names, addresses, salary information, and Social Security numbers. In the wrong hands, this information can lead to identity theft. If your system isn’t secure, you also run the risk of employee theft.

“I’m the only one with the login and password,” you might be thinking. That’s a step in the right direction, but what about the network or server your data is housed on? Security flaws there could leave you open to data theft. When you partner with an online payroll service provider, your data will be stored on highly secure cloud-based servers that employ the latest technologies in encryption, as well as redundant data backups.
We’re going to go out on a limb and guess that your area of expertise does not lie in the convoluted labyrinth of federal and state government regulations; not many small business can claim that either. But that doesn’t mean you’re off the hook for missed filing deadlines or employee misclassification errors (among other compliance pitfalls). If you’re processing payroll in-house, mistakes you make can trigger a government audit resulting in significant penalties and fines. 
It’s impossible to keep up with regulatory changes when you’re trying to run your company. A payroll service for small business has teams that are solely dedicated to keeping up with the ever-changing compliance landscape and understanding the rules around tax and employment law. And, if mistakes are made, they’ll fix them and shoulder the liability for any errors.
As your business grows, you may find you’ve outgrown having nothing but a payroll service and time clocks and realize you need additional people management services.
A good payroll provider can also offer services such as a benefits program, workers’ compensation management, and HR solutions such as performance management or an applicant tracking system.
Professional payroll service providers specialize in the intricacies of government compliance and regulations, taxes, and human resources leaving you free to grow your business. At Paycor, we deliver a unified human capital management solution that includes payroll and is designed to help you succeed. Explore our solutions to learn how Paycor can help you save time, money and headaches.
Paycor offers payroll packages perfect for small businesses. View the detailed features and pricing by clicking the link below.
 Previous:
Next:
Stay up to date with the latest HR trends

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Employee satisfaction surveys are a great way to stay in tune with what your employees are thinking. Get real insights on how to engage and motivate your team.

        Article      
Read Time: 10 min
Employee burnout can impact work quality and morale. Discover the warning signs for burnout and how to prevent it in your workplace.

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Being an effective leader requires more than just technical knowledge. Create an environment where everyone can thrive and understand emotions in oneself and others.
HCM Software
HR + Payroll Software
Talent Management
Workforce Management
Employee Experience
Benefits Administration
Quick Links
Services + Support
855-565-3285
Talk to Sales
855-752-8564
© 2023 Paycor, Inc  |  Refer Paycor  |  Privacy Policy  |  1-800-501-9462 |
*Represents approximately 30,000 corporate clients covering 40,000 businesses employing people