10 Tips to Help Motivate and Retain Restaurant Employees

Showing appreciation, offering growth opportunities, positive culture, and prioritizing health can reduce turnover among restaurant employees. 

Employee Experience
Last Updated: March 10, 2023 | Read Time: 9 min
Everyone knows the restaurant industry can be a fast-paced and demanding grind, but it can also be one of the most rewarding. From the thrill of crafting delicious, visually stunning dishes to the pure satisfaction of providing outstanding customer service, there’s something for everyone in the restaurant biz.
Nearly all good things have a downside, however, and a considerable one in the food and beverage industry is employee turnover. Quit rates for the accommodation and food service sector were 5.4% at the end of 2022, the highest of any industry; the average across all industries is 2.7% (Bureau of Labor Statistics 1). With such high turnover rates, it can be hard to keep your staff (not to mention yourself) engaged and motivated. But don’t worry, we’ve got plenty of ways to reduce turnover and keep your team happy. Here are 10 tips to get you started.
Reducing employee turnover in the restaurant industry requires an ongoing effort from leaders across the business. Paycor’s restaurant program empowers restaurant leaders and frontline managers to develop winning teams through product differentiation, customer experience, and community.
By showing appreciation for your team, creating opportunities for growth, offering flexibility when possible, encouraging a positive culture, and prioritizing employee health and wellness, you’ll be well on your way towards creating a happy work environment where everyone feels valued and appreciated—and where they’re more likely to stick around long-term. Remember, happy employees equal happy customers, and happy customers equal a thriving business.
https://www.bls.gov/news.release/jolts.t04.htm
 Previous:
Next:
Stay up to date with the latest HR trends

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Employee satisfaction surveys are a great way to stay in tune with what your employees are thinking. Get real insights on how to engage and motivate your team.

        Article      
Read Time: 10 min
Employee burnout can impact work quality and morale. Discover the warning signs for burnout and how to prevent it in your workplace.

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Being an effective leader requires more than just technical knowledge. Create an environment where everyone can thrive and understand emotions in oneself and others.
HCM Software
HR + Payroll Software
Talent Management
Workforce Management
Employee Experience
Benefits Administration
Quick Links
Services + Support
855-565-3285
Talk to Sales
855-752-8564
© 2023 Paycor, Inc  |  Refer Paycor  |  Privacy Policy  |  1-800-501-9462 |
*Represents approximately 30,000 corporate clients covering 40,000 businesses employing people