5 Things Small Businesses Need to Know About Coronavirus Paid Leave Rules (Form Included)

The DOL issued changes for paid leave programs through Dec 31, 2020. See the impact and get leave request forms for your business.

Workforce Management
Last Updated: April 17, 2020 | Read Time: 7 min
On April 6, 2020, the Department of Labor (DOL) published regulations on paid leave programs that were first created as part of the Families First Coronavirus Response Act (FFCRA) and later revised in the Coronavirus Aid, Relief and Economic Security Act (CARES Act). The regulations are temporary and will run through December 31, 2020.
The FFCRA and CARES Act were quickly passed to offer new paid leave options for employers with fewer than 500 employees. These options include emergency paid sick leave and emergency FMLA. The new DOL regulations offer clarifications to help SMB leaders manage these new options. Below are five things you need to know to stay compliant.
Download Emergency Paid Sick Leave Form
Generally, private employers with fewer than 500 employees are required to provide FFCRA leave to employees for qualified COVID-19 related reasons.
First, count the following types of employees that make up your workforce:
Note: Independent contractors and employees who have been furloughed or laid off do not count towards the 500-employee threshold.
An employee can receive paid sick leave because of self-quarantine if he/she is unable to work at the normal place of business or telework. This recommendation must come from a professional healthcare provider who has concluded that the employee has COVID-19, may have COVID-19 or is vulnerable to COVID-19. 
Per new regulations, an employee cannot take paid sick leave to care for someone with whom the employee has no personal relationship. An employee is eligible for paid sick leave if they are caring for an immediate family member, roommate or similar person with whom the employee has a relationship.
An employee is only eligible for paid sick leave to care for his or her own child, including stepchild. Employees must also certify that no other “suitable” caretaker is available to care for the employee’s child needs. A suitable caretaker is defined as a co-parent, co-guardian or usual childcare provider. An employee requesting sick leave to care for a child may also be entitled to an additional ten weeks of paid FMLA leave, so long as they were employed for at least 30 days prior to requesting leave.
If an employee requests sick leave to care for a child, the small business is exempt from approving paid sick leave if the requirement would jeopardize the viability of a business.
Any small business that denies FFCRA leave must create and retain documentation supporting their decision. To use the exemption, an employer must show one of the following:
Employers are required to retain all documentation of FFCRA paid leave requests for four years, regardless if the leave request is granted. Employers should also create and retain documents that support claims for tax credits including:
An employer may only ask for the following information:
To help SMBs capture leave requests, Paycor has created an Emergency Paid Sick Leave and Emergency FMLA Request Form that you can share with your employees. The form will allow you to capture the proper documentation needed when managing leave requests.
Javascript is required to interact with this content.
 Previous:
Next:
Stay up to date with the latest HR trends
HCM Software
HR + Payroll Software
Talent Management
Workforce Management
Employee Experience
Benefits Administration
Quick Links
Services + Support
855-565-3285
Talk to Sales
855-752-8564
© 2023 Paycor, Inc  |  Refer Paycor  |  Privacy Policy  |  1-800-501-9462 |
*Represents approximately 30,000 corporate clients covering 40,000 businesses employing people