What is a Union Shop? Closed Shop, Open Shop & Agency Shop

The nuances of closed shop, union shop, open shop, agency shop and right-to-work can impact employers and employees. Find out more here.

Employee Experience
Last Updated:  December 2, 2020 | Read Time: 7 min
A union shop is a place of employment that requires its employees to join a union. At these companies, employees are required to belong to or pay dues to the union as a condition of retaining employment. Union shops are permitted only in states that have not passed “right-to-work” laws prohibiting practices that force employees to join or pay dues or fees to a labor union.
The incoming Biden administration promises to strengthen union rights, incentivize unionization and encourage collective bargaining. Whether these reforms make it to reality is up for debate, but all employers need to understand the potential implications.
The answer is complicated. At the core, unions are solely focused on negotiating the best wages & benefits for their members and employers just want high productivity from their workers. It turns out these goals aren’t always at odds with each other. Labor unions bring certain advantages and disadvantages to a company. Let’s break down the pros and cons.
A Collective Bargaining Agreement (CBA) sets the terms and conditions of employment in a union shop, such as:
Collective bargaining agreements run for a specified timeframe as outlined in the agreement. Unlike a regular contract, the parameters of the conditions don’t end upon the agreement’s expiration. As long as the majority of employees still support the union, union representatives and management are required to bargain in good faith for a new CBA. The terms of the expired CBA continue until a new one is reached.
Manufacturers trust Paycor because we provide the technology + expertise to help them separate from the competition and overcome tough challenges like processing union payroll.
Work with the experts.
Making sure that hours worked, and vacation time taken are appropriately tracked is a necessary task for HR. But it’s even more important for companies that have a significant union labor presence. Don’t put your business at risk. Our time solution can track this data and use it to create quick and accurate reports as well as integrate with your payroll system making every payday a snap.
 Previous:
Next:
Stay up to date with the latest HR trends

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Employee satisfaction surveys are a great way to stay in tune with what your employees are thinking. Get real insights on how to engage and motivate your team.

        Article      
Read Time: 10 min
Employee burnout can impact work quality and morale. Discover the warning signs for burnout and how to prevent it in your workplace.

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Being an effective leader requires more than just technical knowledge. Create an environment where everyone can thrive and understand emotions in oneself and others.
HCM Software
HR + Payroll Software
Talent Management
Workforce Management
Employee Experience
Benefits Administration
Quick Links
Services + Support
855-565-3285
Talk to Sales
855-752-8564
© 2023 Paycor, Inc  |  Refer Paycor  |  Privacy Policy  |  1-800-501-9462 |
*Represents approximately 30,000 corporate clients covering 40,000 businesses employing people