California State Disability Insurance (CA SDI Tax) | In-depth Review

California State Disability Insurance (CA SDI Tax) is a mandatory payroll tax that provides financial aid to employees. Learn more about your eligibility here.

Workforce Management
Last Updated: April 5, 2022 | Read Time: 6 min
Many companies offer temporary disability insurance as a paid benefit to their employees. California, on the other hand, is one of five states that requires an employee-paid state disability insurance (SDI) tax (the other four are Hawaii, New Jersey, New York, and Rhode Island). This tax is levied in addition to the standard required payroll taxes, which include federal income tax, state income tax, Social Security tax, Medicare (and additional Medicare depending on income) tax, and in some instances local tax.
California’s state unemployment insurance, or SUI, is an employer-paid tax used to provide temporary benefits when an employee is laid off. State disability insurance, or SDI, is an employee-paid tax that covers temporary disability.
In California, the funds from this mandatory payroll tax provide financial aid to employees who can’t work as a result of a non-work-related physical (generally covered by Workers’ Compensation benefit) or mental disability, as well as paid family leave for eligible workers. In 2022, eligible California employees can receive an SDI benefit equal to 60-70% of their regular wages, up to $1,540 per week and up to $80,080 in total.
If they prefer, companies that have employees in California can apply to the California Employment Development Department (EDD) for approval of their own private short-term disability insurance and family leave plan, called a Voluntary Plan (VP) rather than using the state’s program.
To qualify, the VP must:
In 2022, companies with their own programs must pay the EDD an administrative fee of 0.154% to cover expenses.
The employee contribution rate, maximum contribution per employee, and the maximum benefit payments or amount changes on January 1 of every year.
In 2022, employees in California who are covered by SDI and PFL are required to contribute 1.1% of their first $145,600 in taxable wages, up to a maximum contribution of $1,601.60 per year. The administrative assessment rate is calculated by multiplying the employee contribution rate by 14% or 1.1% x 14% = 0.154% (CUIC 3252 [b]).
California’s SDI program is intended to serve as a temporary measure when an employee will be off work for a short period of time following a non-work-related injury, such as breaking a leg falling down the stairs at home. Social Security Disability Insurance (SSDI) is a federal program for permanent disability that is expected to last for at least 12 months.
SDI Tax is a term that means State Disability Insurance tax.
Five states have SDI Tax, California (CA SDI Tax), Hawaii, New Jersey, New York, and Rhode Island.
Each state with a disability tax sets its own rates. Here are the tax rates for 2022 for each state that runs its own program: 
Paycor creates Human Capital Management (HCM) software for leaders who want to make a difference. Our HCM platform modernizes every aspect of people management, from recruiting, onboarding, and paying associates, to developing and retaining them. But what really sets us apart is our focus on business leaders. For more than 30 years, we’ve been listening to and partnering with leaders, so we know what they need: HR technology that saves time, powerful analytics that provide actionable insights, and personalized support. That’s why more than 29,000 customers trust Paycor to help them solve problems and achieve their goals.
 Previous:
Next:
Stay up to date with the latest HR trends

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Employee satisfaction surveys are a great way to stay in tune with what your employees are thinking. Get real insights on how to engage and motivate your team.

        Article      
Read Time: 10 min
Employee burnout can impact work quality and morale. Discover the warning signs for burnout and how to prevent it in your workplace.

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Being an effective leader requires more than just technical knowledge. Create an environment where everyone can thrive and understand emotions in oneself and others.
HCM Software
HR + Payroll Software
Talent Management
Workforce Management
Employee Experience
Benefits Administration
Quick Links
Services + Support
855-565-3285
Talk to Sales
855-752-8564
© 2023 Paycor, Inc  |  Refer Paycor  |  Privacy Policy  |  1-800-501-9462 |
*Represents approximately 30,000 corporate clients covering 40,000 businesses employing people