How Does Payroll Processing Work?

From gathering appropriate employee documents to making time entries, payroll can be a confusing process. Find out how payroll processing really works!

Workforce Management
Last Updated:  December 24, 2020 | Read Time: 7 min
Processing payroll is an unavoidable part of running a business and if you’re going it alone it’ll be a time-consuming and frustrating experience. It’s not just about doing the hard sums and keeping careful records. You’ll also need to keep up to date with the latest tax rules and regulations.
Ultimately, paying your people accurately and on time is too big a burden to be shouldered alone. That’s why companies rely on a HR and online payroll partner to provide technology and expertise that can simplify the complex process.
If you’re wondering what that process looks like, here’s an overview. We’ll also discuss why finding the right partner can help free up your day and prevent costly fines from impacting your business.
Here’s what’s included:
Human resource managers start by collecting some or all the following employee information:
Employees are then informed about their paycheck schedule and how the company expects work hours recorded. Typically, most employers choose to pay employees every two weeks.
At the end of the pay period, the payroll administrator verifies hours worked and secures approval for payment, including any supplemental income from bonuses or overtime.
Net pay is calculated based on gross earnings minus the total amount of deductions and withholdings (federal, state, and local taxes, retirement contributions, medical insurance, additional deductions such as child support, etc). When administrators calculate wages, they need to know which deductions to take before or after taxes have been assessed. For more information on tax withholdings, the IRS offers this comprehensive tax guide. States often have different rules than the IRS, and state specific guides should be consulted to determine employer withholding requirements.
Paychecks are delivered to employees and the amounts withheld submitted to the appropriate entity. Employers are responsible for a share of payroll taxes. Calculating and submitting to taxing authorities on time avoids hefty fines and penalties.
Federal and state payroll reports are generated and sent as often as quarterly. Payroll departments are responsible for a lot of data and paperwork, much of which is sensitive in nature. It can be challenging to develop an adequate filing system where all that data and employee information can be maintained and accessed whenever necessary.

Payroll is a vital, but complex function of a business. Because of the strict compliance regulations and potential for employee lawsuits, most businesses utilize payroll technology that reduces the risk of errors, ensures compliance and saves time. Payroll software companies offer solutions that handle many of the tedious administrative payroll details and streamline the ever-complicated tax filing process so businesses can focus on accomplishing their goals.
Companies that don’t leverage the benefits of modern technology because “this is the way we’ve always done it” are at a huge disadvantage. Late adopters risk falling so far behind it will be difficult to ever catch up to the competition.
When it comes to managing payroll, there is little upside if you get it right and major downside if you get it wrong. Your people, and federal and local tax agencies, expect to be paid accurately and on time, and there are consequences when they aren’t. With a laundry list of regulations to maintain, staying in compliance is no easy feat. So, if you’re struggling with any of the challenges below, it’s time to consider making the leap.
Partnering with an HR & payroll provider gives you the freedom to spend more time focusing on your business. Customer service is important in every industry and it’s no different in the field of payroll processing. You’ll get peace of mind working with a company that provides instant access to expert support when you need it.

Think about how much easier it would be if your payroll system could:
Once you move to automated payroll, many providers offer the ability to scale services as your business grows. You can add integrations that streamline and consolidate all human resource activities into one cloud-based solution. When you’re ready, expanding your system makes it possible for you to:
Technology has transformed how we live and do business. Automating your payroll processing system streamlines tasks and improves efficiency, which translates into valuable time and money you’ll be able to apply elsewhere.
HR & payroll technology alone isn’t enough because technology alone fails to address your challenges. To achieve your goals now and in the future, you need technology plus expertise. Download this buyer’s guide and we’ll show you how to make the best decision for your organization.
More than 30,000 medium-sized and small businesses trust Paycor to help them manage their most valuable asset – their people. Paycor is known for delivering modern, intuitive recruiting, HR and payroll software, but what distinguishes us is our singular focus on helping business leaders, entrepreneurs and HR professionals make a real difference in their organizations. Contact our team today to learn how we can help you make an impact in your organization.
NOTE: This information is only intended to provide an overview of the payroll process. If you have specific questions, we recommend that you contact your payroll provider.

 Previous:
Next:
Stay up to date with the latest HR trends

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Employee satisfaction surveys are a great way to stay in tune with what your employees are thinking. Get real insights on how to engage and motivate your team.

        Article      
Read Time: 10 min
Employee burnout can impact work quality and morale. Discover the warning signs for burnout and how to prevent it in your workplace.

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Being an effective leader requires more than just technical knowledge. Create an environment where everyone can thrive and understand emotions in oneself and others.
HCM Software
HR + Payroll Software
Talent Management
Workforce Management
Employee Experience
Benefits Administration
Quick Links
Services + Support
855-565-3285
Talk to Sales
855-752-8564
© 2023 Paycor, Inc  |  Refer Paycor  |  Privacy Policy  |  1-800-501-9462 |
*Represents approximately 30,000 corporate clients covering 40,000 businesses employing people