Importance of Employee Financial Wellness Programs for Small Businesses

Investing in employee financial wellness programs can increase overall productivity and improve retention. Check out our latest blog and learn how such a program can benefit your small business.

Benefits Administration
Last Updated:  July 22, 2020 | Read Time: 4 min
The majority of people seem to be relatively well-informed about personal wellness: physical activity, eating right, drinking the recommended amount of water every day. But many people are unfamiliar with the term “financial wellness.”
Financial wellness refers to someone’s overall economic health as well as their lack of worry associated with money. Poor financial health is a known cause of personal and professional stress. Issues with finances can be a distraction at work. In addition to the monetary burden, the side effects of poor financial health often include:
As life goes on it gets more complex, especially regarding financial matters: student loans, retirement savings, household budgeting, daycare costs, estate planning, rent and mortgages, and many other variables contribute to complex and stressful issues that employees often can’t simply leave at home.
The American Psychological Association’s (APA) 2019 Stress in America Survey found that 60% of the approximately 3500 survey participants indicated that money is a significant source of stress. So how can you help?
Many companies are increasingly offering financial wellness programs to help employees get their finances in order. A survey conducted by the Employee Benefit Research Institute (EBRI) found that about 50% of companies with more than 500 employees offer some sort of financial wellness program. The good news is that smaller companies can absolutely do the same thing.
A financial wellness program is designed to educate employees about the proper way to manage their money. Many plans include tools such as financial counseling and coaching either online or through an employee assistance program (EAP), credit counseling, and retirement modeling calculators.
Just like with physical wellness programs, you’ll find many options to include in your financial wellness plan. Depending on the makeup of your workforce, some of these ideas might not work for your culture.
Give your employees the necessary resources and tools to help prevent the side effects of unhealthy finances before it becomes a problem. You’ll save your company time and money with a relatively minimal cost that’s worth every penny.

 Previous:
Next:
Stay up to date with the latest HR trends

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Employee satisfaction surveys are a great way to stay in tune with what your employees are thinking. Get real insights on how to engage and motivate your team.

        Article      
Read Time: 10 min
Employee burnout can impact work quality and morale. Discover the warning signs for burnout and how to prevent it in your workplace.

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Being an effective leader requires more than just technical knowledge. Create an environment where everyone can thrive and understand emotions in oneself and others.
HCM Software
HR + Payroll Software
Talent Management
Workforce Management
Employee Experience
Benefits Administration
Quick Links
Services + Support
855-565-3285
Talk to Sales
855-752-8564
© 2023 Paycor, Inc  |  Refer Paycor  |  Privacy Policy  |  1-800-501-9462 |
*Represents approximately 30,000 corporate clients covering 40,000 businesses employing people