How to Build Irresistible Benefits Packages for Employees

Offering competitive salaries is part what it takes to recruit top talent. Employee benefits packages play a role too. See how to impact recruiting.

Benefits Administration
Last Updated:  November 15, 2019 | Read Time: 7 min
While a competitive salary is an essential part of attracting top talent, in today’s hot hiring market, the employee benefits package is just as important.
More than ever before, employees are being offered robust and interesting job benefits as organizations strive to keep pace with the shifting culture of work today. Historically, offering health insurance and a 401k were the expected aspects of a benefits package. Today, employees are being offered benefits packages that include generous vacation policies and flexible working arrangements.
In this article, we’ll share the most important aspects of an employee benefits package. You’ll learn what to offer in order to fully support your employees from their first day and beyond.
Employee benefits are nothing without health insurance. It’s absolutely essential that an employee benefits package includes health insurance. Today’s health insurance premiums are almost impossible to afford without employer support. Health insurance is easily misunderstood and complex. Let us break down the most important aspects of health insurance.
According to the Affordable Care Act (ACA) when an employer reaches 50 full-time employees, there are specific requirements in terms of benefits.
HMOs or Health Maintenance Organization plans are comprised of a network of healthcare providers and medical centers. HMO members often have a primary doctor that manages most of their care. If members need access to a specialist, they typically must route through a PCP first for a referral. An HMO is usually the least amount of paperwork but offers less flexibility to choose providers.
The best employee benefits package is the package that is the most supportive of your employees. Of course, healthcare benefits are universally important. Beyond the basics, generous vacation and workplace flexibility are now becoming the new expectation as employees value freedom and balance. To piece together the most compelling benefits package, be sure to spend time understanding your workforce and what’s important to them.
 Previous:
Next:
Stay up to date with the latest HR trends

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Employee satisfaction surveys are a great way to stay in tune with what your employees are thinking. Get real insights on how to engage and motivate your team.

        Article      
Read Time: 10 min
Employee burnout can impact work quality and morale. Discover the warning signs for burnout and how to prevent it in your workplace.

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Being an effective leader requires more than just technical knowledge. Create an environment where everyone can thrive and understand emotions in oneself and others.
HCM Software
HR + Payroll Software
Talent Management
Workforce Management
Employee Experience
Benefits Administration
Quick Links
Services + Support
855-565-3285
Talk to Sales
855-752-8564
© 2023 Paycor, Inc  |  Refer Paycor  |  Privacy Policy  |  1-800-501-9462 |
*Represents approximately 30,000 corporate clients covering 40,000 businesses employing people