Ask HR: How Do We Verify I-9 Documents for Out-of-State New Hires?

Paycor and HR Support Center answers the question, how should a company validate I-9 documents for newly hired out-of-state workers?

Workforce Management
Last Updated:  January 11, 2016 | Read Time: 4 min
As every HR professional knows, I-9 forms are a necessity in today’s
business world. Every employee a business hires must complete an I-9
form in order to verify their identity and authorization to work in
the United States. Not only must the form be completed, but the
documents shown as proof must be verified in person.
So, what’s a company to do when they work in one state and the employee
they’ve recently hired works in another state? The HR experts at
HR
Support Center have the answer.
Question:
We’ve hired some new employees who live and will work out of state. How
do I handle the validation of the required I-9 documents?
Answer from Eric, HR Pro:
I-9 forms present a challenge to employers who hire remote employees.
The U.S. Citizenship and Immigration Services (USCIS) requires that
all documents required for the I-9 must be viewed in their original
format. Therefore, a fax or scan is not acceptable. Instead, the
original documents must be in-hand when the I-9 is completed and signed
by a company representative.
Here are a few options, each of which must be done within three days
of the new hire beginning work:
the I-9. This person should carry out full I-9 responsibilities,
completing all sections of the I-9.
representative may be any individual, although notaries public are the
most common choice. Be aware that some notaries cannot or will not sign
Section 2 due to state notary regulations. If a notary does act as your
representative, they should not apply their seal on the Form I-9.
Whatever route you choose, remember that you remain liable for any
violations in connection with the I-9 form or the verification
process. Whenever possible, we recommend bringing new employees to
your main location for paperwork, onboarding, and training.
Eric
has extensive experience in HR, management, and training. He has held
several senior HR positions, including as the HR & Operations Manager
for an award-winning interactive marketing agency and as HR Director for
a national law firm. Eric graduated with a Bachelor’s of Science in
Economics from the University of Oregon with a minor in Business
Administration. Eric is also active in the community, volunteering with
the regional Human Resources Management Association Advocacy Team and
with youth training programs.
Do you have an effective onboarding process at your organization? Paycor
can help you
take
onboarding online, with electronic forms completion and other great
features.
Contact
us to learn more, and then check out our
90-day
onboarding checklist for more great tips.
 Previous:
Next:
Stay up to date with the latest HR trends

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Employee satisfaction surveys are a great way to stay in tune with what your employees are thinking. Get real insights on how to engage and motivate your team.

        Article      
Read Time: 10 min
Employee burnout can impact work quality and morale. Discover the warning signs for burnout and how to prevent it in your workplace.

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Being an effective leader requires more than just technical knowledge. Create an environment where everyone can thrive and understand emotions in oneself and others.
HCM Software
HR + Payroll Software
Talent Management
Workforce Management
Employee Experience
Benefits Administration
Quick Links
Services + Support
855-565-3285
Talk to Sales
855-752-8564
© 2023 Paycor, Inc  |  Refer Paycor  |  Privacy Policy  |  1-800-501-9462 |
*Represents approximately 30,000 corporate clients covering 40,000 businesses employing people