Payroll Garnishments 101

There are multiple types of garnishments that can be withheld from an employees paycheck. Get the facts on payroll garnishments here.

Workforce Management
Last Updated: December 24, 2020 | Read Time: 5 min
If you’re running payroll, you need to understand payroll garnishments. The good news is, we have you covered. Here’s everything you need to know.
A payroll garnishment occurs when a court issues an order requiring an employer to withhold a certain amount from an employee’s paycheck and send it directly to the organization or person owed money, until the debt is fully paid. While different garnishment rules apply to varying types of debt, there are maximum limits to how much can be garnished from an employee’s paycheck.
Most creditors are required to provide a court order to garnish wages and federal law mandates how much can be taken from an employee’s paycheck.

If one of your employees owes money to a private creditor and is unable to pay, they can be sued. If the creditor wins the lawsuit, or receives a default judgment, they will be able to serve you with a court order to garnish your employee’s wages. Receipt of a wage garnishment order obligates you to:
Up to 50% of an employee’s disposable earnings can be garnished to compensate for child support if that employee is currently supporting a spouse or child not the subject of the order (such as being remarried). In the event that an employee is not supporting another spouse or child, up to 60% of his/her earnings can be seized. If an employee is more than 12 weeks in arrears on paying child support, these rates go up to 55/65% percent respectively.
Note for employers: An employee cannot be terminated, disciplined or retaliated against because their wages are garnished for child support payments.
The U.S. Department of Education and other government agencies attempting to recuperate unpaid debt like a student loan have the ability to garnish up to 15% of an employee’s compensation for failure to pay a student loan. Unlike other garnishments, a lawsuit or court order is not required for this action. An employer must be notified a minimum of 30 days before the garnishment is set to commence of the following:
Tax authorities have their own parameters for wage garnishment. The IRS determines the amount owed based on how many dependents and employee claims and their standard deduction amount. State taxing authorities may have their own methods for determination. The IRS will deliver a notice before they begin garnishing, but keep in mind they aren’t required to get a judgment first.
Employers can face a difficult and sometimes uncomfortable task complying with wage garnishment mandates while balancing sensitivity around challenging circumstances affecting your employees. Paycor helps you navigate these complex circumstances and ensure compliance with our online payroll platform and wage garnishment processing service that creates, calculates, deducts and disburses garnishments on your behalf.
Paycor is not a legal, tax, benefit, accounting or investment advisor. All communication from Paycor should be confirmed by your company’s legal, tax, benefit, accounting or investment advisor before making any decisions.
At Paycor, our unique combination of technology and expertise helps our customers streamline every aspect of people management so they can focus on what they know best—their business and their mission. Read our article on how to manage garnishment processing accurately and efficiently. Or, contact our team directly so we can learn more about your needs.
Sources: Garnishmentlaws.org, NOLO.com & TheBalance.com
 Previous:
Next:
Stay up to date with the latest HR trends

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Employee satisfaction surveys are a great way to stay in tune with what your employees are thinking. Get real insights on how to engage and motivate your team.

        Article      
Read Time: 10 min
Employee burnout can impact work quality and morale. Discover the warning signs for burnout and how to prevent it in your workplace.

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Being an effective leader requires more than just technical knowledge. Create an environment where everyone can thrive and understand emotions in oneself and others.
HCM Software
HR + Payroll Software
Talent Management
Workforce Management
Employee Experience
Benefits Administration
Quick Links
Services + Support
855-565-3285
Talk to Sales
855-752-8564
© 2023 Paycor, Inc  |  Refer Paycor  |  Privacy Policy  |  1-800-501-9462 |
*Represents approximately 30,000 corporate clients covering 40,000 businesses employing people