The Importance of Conducting Background Checks for Employment

Hiring the wrong employee can be costly.  Safeguard the integrity of your organization by performing background checks.

Talent Management
Last Updated:  May 16, 2018 | Read Time: 7 min
Making a bad hire can cost you big time. The Department of Labor (DOL) says a bad hire can set you back by 30% of that employee’s first-year salary. That kind of money can add up quickly, so you can’t afford to let poor background checks get in the way of your company’s profitability.
We’ve all seen it: Sometimes an applicant presents really well at the initial stage and you’re eager to get them into the hiring funnel ASAP. But do you really ever know what’s lurking behind that interview persona? No. You’ve got to probe deeper than what’s presented at face value and not let a great first impression cloud your judgment.
In our current highly competitive job market, applicants are more likely to either exaggerate or over up certain aspects of their histories so they can improve their chances of moving up to the top of your list. A well-trained recruiter can typically sniff out when an applicant is embellishing the truth, but a lot of potential pitfalls aren’t always easy to spot. That’s why conducting an employee background check during the hiring process is so important.
A background check should be thought of as a preventive measure that helps to safeguard the integrity of your company as well as the safety of your current employees. Some applicants might not be appropriate for certain positions due to something that’s revealed in their personal history. For example, a person who’s found to have an assault conviction is probably not going to be the most appropriate candidate for a security officer position. Or, an applicant who has been arrested for a recent, serious drug violation might not be the best person to work in a hospital or other medical facility with accessibility to controlled substances. This type of information can only be found with a background check and reinforces the need to investigate prior to an offer being made.

It’s important to note that while criminal background checks are important, employers must be careful to ensure these checks are not discriminatory. The Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC) has issued guidance to help employers ensure their background check process does not discriminate on applicants because of race, national origin, or another protected class. There are two ways this might happen:
The EEOC also recommends allowing the candidate who is excluded the opportunity to show why he should not be excluded.
Your applicants have legal rights that need to be adhered to. For example, federal and some state laws mandate that you can’t run a background check without the applicant’s permission. While they’re done to protect the company, a proper background check also has to be measured with respect for the privacy of each applicant and stay within the parameters of compliance laws.
Any time you use an applicant’s background information to make an employment decision, you have to comply with federal laws that protect them from discrimination, including discrimination based on age, race, color, national origin, sex, religion, disability or genetic information. But you’ve got to make sure that you treat everyone equally.
Using a third-party service or background screening software built into an applicant tracking system are the most typical and easiest ways to conduct background checks. In most instances the talent management software you use will include the appropriate legalese to get background check permission from each candidate, as well as track reasons for non-selection, which is important to help ensure compliance with EEOC regulations.
To be sure, hiring new employees can be sort of like walking a tightrope. You’ve got to find the right candidates with the best qualifications for the job, but at the same time stay away from accepting at face value the information a candidate has on their resume. To help ensure you make good hires, you have to dig deep into your applicants’ backgrounds so you can get a better idea of existing abilities and predicted on-the-job performance.
Doing your due diligence and performing a background check is simply no longer an option; it’s a necessity to business success.
Paycor’s ATS integrates with leading background screening experts to ensure sensitive data is handled properly. To learn more, contact one of our expert consultants today.

 Previous:
Next:
Stay up to date with the latest HR trends

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Employee satisfaction surveys are a great way to stay in tune with what your employees are thinking. Get real insights on how to engage and motivate your team.

        Article      
Read Time: 10 min
Employee burnout can impact work quality and morale. Discover the warning signs for burnout and how to prevent it in your workplace.

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Being an effective leader requires more than just technical knowledge. Create an environment where everyone can thrive and understand emotions in oneself and others.
HCM Software
HR + Payroll Software
Talent Management
Workforce Management
Employee Experience
Benefits Administration
Quick Links
Services + Support
855-565-3285
Talk to Sales
855-752-8564
© 2023 Paycor, Inc  |  Refer Paycor  |  Privacy Policy  |  1-800-501-9462 |
*Represents approximately 30,000 corporate clients covering 40,000 businesses employing people