Cheat Sheet: COVID-19 Employment Laws

Employment law changes due to COVID-19 have immediate impacts to small businesses. Stay ahead of the curve with this cheat sheet.

Workforce Management
Last Updated:  November 18, 2020 | Read Time: 7 min
In response to the COVID-19 pandemic, there have been legislative changes that have dramatic and immediate impacts to businesses. To help, SMB leaders navigate the recent updates, we’ve put together this cheat sheet. You’ll find a summary of the new laws along with links to resources to keep you informed on:
U.S. Department of Labor (DOL) – FFCRA FAQs
Emergency Sick Leave for Childcare: What Employers Need to Know About FFCRA
Families First Coronavirus Response Act: Tips to Manage Employee Leave Scenarios
Paycheck Protection Program (PPP): Loan Forgiveness
Paycor’s PPP Dashboard: Track Your Paycheck Protection Loan Spending
Department of Treasury – CARES Act – Assistance for Small Businesses
Paycheck Protection Program (PPP): What You Need to Know
How to Apply for a Coronavirus Small Business Loan
IRS – Deferral of Employment Tax Deposits
CARES Act: What SMBs Need to Know
When the employer credit exceeds the available tax liability, form 7200 can be utilized to request the remaining credit amount.
IRS – Employee Retention Credit FAQ
IRS – Employee Social Security Tax Deferral https://www.irs.gov/pub/irs-drop/n-20-65.pdf
The Families First Coronavirus Response Act (FFCRA) and the Coronavirus Aid Relief and Economic Security Act (CARES Act) contain four distinct programs aimed at providing relief to employers impacted by COVID-19:
Not all programs may be used by all employers. Participation in one program may restrict eligibility for others.
Employers should consult the specific legislative and administrative guidance for each program to determine if they are eligible. In general:
In general:
* Section 1102 of the CARES Act specifically excludes amounts paid under the Families First emergency paid leave program from the definition of “payroll costs” for PPP loan purposes.
We’re keeping our clients aware of changes and automatically updating our products every day with the latest tax, compliance and federal, state and local relief programs. Contact our team today to learn how we can support your business through this time.
We’re also publishing expert advice and timely information to help SMB leaders navigate the COVID-19 public health emergency. Visit Paycor’s Coronavirus Support Center for more.
 Previous:
Next:
Stay up to date with the latest HR trends

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Employee satisfaction surveys are a great way to stay in tune with what your employees are thinking. Get real insights on how to engage and motivate your team.

        Article      
Read Time: 10 min
Employee burnout can impact work quality and morale. Discover the warning signs for burnout and how to prevent it in your workplace.

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Being an effective leader requires more than just technical knowledge. Create an environment where everyone can thrive and understand emotions in oneself and others.
HCM Software
HR + Payroll Software
Talent Management
Workforce Management
Employee Experience
Benefits Administration
Quick Links
Services + Support
855-565-3285
Talk to Sales
855-752-8564
© 2023 Paycor, Inc  |  Refer Paycor  |  Privacy Policy  |  1-800-501-9462 |
*Represents approximately 30,000 corporate clients covering 40,000 businesses employing people