3 Ways to Help Your Clients Reduce Turnover

As a benefits broker you need to help your clients reduce employee turnover. Here are three tips that will help fight the war on talent.

Employee Experience
Last Updated:  October 3, 2019 | Read Time: 3 min
In July 2019, 3.6 million people quit their jobs according to the Bureau of Labor Statistics’ Job Openings and Labor Turnover Survey. That’s the highest number of individuals who voluntarily left their workplace in a given month since the BLS started tracking the metric in December 2000.
Every business experiences employee turnover—there’s no way to avoid it. But in today’s tight labor market, employers need to put their best foot forward in order to attract desirable candidates and keep their top performers. Check with your clients to see if they’re using the following tactics to help reduce turnover at their organization.
Sounds like a no-brainer, right? To help ensure you’re getting quality candidates, implement an employee referral program in which your current employees are rewarded in some way for recommending applicants. Employee referral programs can reduce the time it takes to fill open positions and yield higher quality candidates who stay longer. LinkedIn’s recent Global Talent Study showed that 48% of businesses say their high-quality candidates come from employee referrals.
Labor costs are by far the biggest expense for most companies, but it’s important not to overspend in order to attract new talent. Research the average pay rate offered by your competitors for similar jobs—a task made easier thanks to online sites such as Glassdoor—and take location into consideration before establishing a baseline salary. As your budget allows, try bumping up that baseline a bit to make the position even more attractive.
It’s equally as important not to underspend when retaining your top performers. Your workforce is your top asset and investing in their wellbeing should be a top priority. A competitive salary (or bonus!) can incentivize your employees to do their best while helping with morale and productivity.
The absence of benefits or the wrong benefits can drive up turnover rates. Employers need to pay particular attention to ensure they’re offering the right mix of benefits for a multigenerational workforce. Take it a step further than the traditional medical and dental options. For instance, would you consider your workplace a “wellness” company? Do you offer financial wellbeing seminars? Is telecommuting or working remotely an option as needed? Each generation prioritizes different benefits, so offering a good mix is a sure-fire way to attract talent.
To see how your business can derive the necessary information to help reduce turnover, check out our latest report, The HR Playbook: 10 Metrics that Prove the Value of HR.
 Previous:
Next:
Stay up to date with the latest HR trends

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Employee satisfaction surveys are a great way to stay in tune with what your employees are thinking. Get real insights on how to engage and motivate your team.

        Article      
Read Time: 10 min
Employee burnout can impact work quality and morale. Discover the warning signs for burnout and how to prevent it in your workplace.

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Being an effective leader requires more than just technical knowledge. Create an environment where everyone can thrive and understand emotions in oneself and others.
HCM Software
HR + Payroll Software
Talent Management
Workforce Management
Employee Experience
Benefits Administration
Quick Links
Services + Support
855-565-3285
Talk to Sales
855-752-8564
© 2023 Paycor, Inc  |  Refer Paycor  |  Privacy Policy  |  1-800-501-9462 |
*Represents approximately 30,000 corporate clients covering 40,000 businesses employing people