Creating a Coronavirus Mask Policy for Work [with Template]

As America gradually returns to work in phases, many businesses will want to implement a mask policy. Get a FREE mask policy template, here.

Clearly communicate mask rules to your workplace with this policy template.
Download Your 
                                   Free Copy 

DOWNLOADS:  750 And Counting...!
Get a Head Start on Your Mask Policy

January 13, 2022 Update: The Supreme Court ruled to block the proposed vaccine-or-test mandate for large employers (businesses with 100 employees or more). In a separate ruling, the court voted in favor of a vaccine mandate for workers employed at healthcare facilities that receive federal funding through Medicare and Medicaid. It’s estimated that this ruling could affect more than 17 million workers.
For healthcare organizations and employers that choose to establish vaccination and testing requirements, Paycor is here to support you with an immunization tracker, expert HR advice and a comprehensive suite of products to help keep your business compliant. Contact our team or learn more here.
By now, the evidence is clear—masks work. Face-coverings protect the wearer and those around them. Many localities are mandating the wearing of masks in public areas. However, as we face a winter of disruption, private companies also have a role to play fighting the spread of Covid-19. Creating a mask policy is a great start.




As our understanding of COVID evolves, there’s been a lot of debate about the effectiveness and best use of masks. Initially, masks were seen as necessary for healthcare workers but overkill for the general public. Now there’s a growing consensus that masks and face coverings can help prevent the spread of coronavirus. Even a little extra protection can prove crucial, but the quality of masks varies, and the type required depends on what kind of work employees do. Here’s what you need to know.




The first step is for employers to establish the risk level for any employee.




Remember, masks are not a replacement for social distancing. And for the most part, employees who can work from home should. For those who can’t, it’s the employer’s responsibility to create a safe working environment.




It IS legal for businesses to require that employees wear masks. However, employers need to be aware that mandating masks may make them subject to OSHA standards related to Personal Protective Equipment, which means they must:




There are further, more stringent rules covering the use of ‘respirator’ masks.




Certain employees may have health conditions which don’t allow them to easily wear a mask—if so, they should be excused from high-risk and medium-risk roles. However, in all other cases employees should not be permitted to work without the required mask or face-covering. This is not just about their safety, it’s about the safety of their colleagues and their communities.




Different industries and job roles will require different standards of masks. Here are the most common types:






Workplace mask policies can save lives, help employees feel safer and allow businesses to thrive during this crisis. To help small to medium sized businesses, Paycor is sharing a customizable Workplace Mask policy template.





NEXT:
NEXT: