Year-End Preparation   Resource Center

Year end can be a stressful time for businesses. Let Paycor help get you prepared and ready for year end.

Workforce Management
Last Updated:  November 3, 2015 | Read Time: 2 min
Year-end is a busy time for businesses, and it can be stressful to think
about all the things you need to do to prepare for the end of one year
and the beginning of the next. According to Paycor’s own payroll expert
Arlene Baker, year-end preparation can be broken down into three Cs:
checklist, communicate and coordinate. If you follow the three Cs,
year end will seem less overwhelming.
Give yourself peace of mind by getting organized with a year-end
checklist. Walk through everything you need to do to close out this
year and begin the next. Items on your checklist could include:
* Verify employee information to ensure correct W-2s
* Verify that company information, such as state unemployment rates, is
correct
* Request to have your payroll provider hold your books open if
necessary
* Reconcile all four quarters of 941s
* Report all independent contractors’ earnings for 1099s
* Anything else that may be unique to your company’s year-end
preparations
Be sure to communicate with the people who are providing you with the
year-end information you need, such as your company’s controller or your
CPA. Once you have that information, communicate it to your payroll
provider.
It’s important to coordinate with your team on any details around
finalizing the year-end process. Examples include:
* Determining at what point you need all the necessary information to
make your payroll processor’s deadlines
* Ensuring you are prepared for compliance in the coming year by
updating state unemployment rates
* Deciding on next year’s payroll schedule
* Updating for next year any employee pay rate changes and benefit
accruals such as paid time off
Following the three Cs of year-end—checklist, communicate and
coordinate—can help you stay on top of your year-end tasks.
 Previous:
Next:
Stay up to date with the latest HR trends

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Employee satisfaction surveys are a great way to stay in tune with what your employees are thinking. Get real insights on how to engage and motivate your team.

        Article      
Read Time: 10 min
Employee burnout can impact work quality and morale. Discover the warning signs for burnout and how to prevent it in your workplace.

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Being an effective leader requires more than just technical knowledge. Create an environment where everyone can thrive and understand emotions in oneself and others.
HCM Software
HR + Payroll Software
Talent Management
Workforce Management
Employee Experience
Benefits Administration
Quick Links
Services + Support
855-565-3285
Talk to Sales
855-752-8564
© 2023 Paycor, Inc  |  Refer Paycor  |  Privacy Policy  |  1-800-501-9462 |
*Represents approximately 30,000 corporate clients covering 40,000 businesses employing people