Ask HR: How to Handle Compensation for Early Resignations

Learn how to handle compensation for early resignations, or when your employee leaves immediately rather than on their stated last day.

Workforce Management
Last Updated:  March 14, 2016 | Read Time: 3 min
It happens to every employer: an employee decides to leave the company.
Sometimes, the employee leaves on great terms and finishes out a
two-week notice. Other times, unfortunately, a manager may wish for the
employee to leave right away. In the case of an involuntary early
departure, when does compensation for the affected employee end?
Question:
We had an employee give his two weeks’ notice, but the manager decided
to let him go immediately. We paid the employee through the last day he
worked, but he claims he should be paid for the two weeks he had planned
to work. What are the legal requirements here?
Answer from Jenny, HR Pro:
As long as you don’t have an employment contract with the employee, a
collective bargaining agreement that applies to the employee, or a
handbook policy that requires a certain period of notice, you may opt to
accept his resignation early.
You do not have to pay the employee for the portion of the notice period
during which he performed no work. So if he was a non-exempt
(overtime-eligible) employee, you simply need to pay him for all time
worked. And if he was an
exempt
employee, you only need to pay him his regular salary through his last
day worked.
A final note: terminating the employee early without providing pay
through the unworked notice period is legal, but it may affect the
employee’s unemployment eligibility. The company will essentially be
turning a voluntary resignation into an involuntary termination.
Therefore, he may become eligible for some unemployment benefits.
Over
her 15 years of experience, Jenny has specialized in helping small to
mid-sized businesses across a variety of industries reduce their risks
and manage employee relationship issues. Jenny holds a Bachelors of
Business Administration (BBA) degree in Human Resources Management from
the University of Georgia and a Masters of Business Administration (MBA)
degree with a concentration in Human Resources Management from Georgia
State University.
This content came from a team of HR professionals at HR Support Center.
Businesses like yours can pay a yearly fee for HR Support Center and
receive awesome subscription perks like these:
* Legal advice
* Employee handbook help (creating a new one or updating an existing
one)
* Custom HR forms, letters, tools, and other documents
* Tons of Q&A
* News on government activity that could affect you
* Training on common HR activities like hiring
* Thought leadership articles
The list goes on. HR Support Center is not only feature rich, it’s
inexpensive: one entire year of
HR
Support Center is cheaper than one hour of a typical attorney’s
time.
Contact
us today to sign up.
Enter your email below to receive a weekly recap of the latest articles
from Paycor’s Resource Center.


MktoForms2.loadForm("//app-ab01.marketo.com", "003-JWW-697", 1796);
Check your inbox
for an email confirming your subscription. Enjoy!
 Previous:
Next:
Stay up to date with the latest HR trends

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Employee satisfaction surveys are a great way to stay in tune with what your employees are thinking. Get real insights on how to engage and motivate your team.

        Article      
Read Time: 10 min
Employee burnout can impact work quality and morale. Discover the warning signs for burnout and how to prevent it in your workplace.

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Being an effective leader requires more than just technical knowledge. Create an environment where everyone can thrive and understand emotions in oneself and others.
HCM Software
HR + Payroll Software
Talent Management
Workforce Management
Employee Experience
Benefits Administration
Quick Links
Services + Support
855-565-3285
Talk to Sales
855-752-8564
© 2023 Paycor, Inc  |  Refer Paycor  |  Privacy Policy  |  1-800-501-9462 |
*Represents approximately 30,000 corporate clients covering 40,000 businesses employing people