Three Keys to Effective Onboarding for New Hires

Effective onboarding can mean higher retention rates, more productivity and positive employee morale. Consider these tips for your new hires

Employee Experience
Last Updated:  February 20, 2017 | Read Time: 4 min
Filling available positions can be an expensive and time-consuming endeavor for many companies. Start with the recruiting process. Between advertising positions, reviewing stacks of resumes and interviewing multiple candidates, a lot of effort goes into finding and hiring the right fit. But that’s only the beginning. Many organizations celebrate an exhaustive hiring process but forget about the next important piece of the puzzle. Onboarding.
It’s no surprise then that over half of employees that leave their job do so within the first year of employment because of a lack of training, engagement or introduction to the position/organization. An effective onboarding program is essential in reducing this initial turnover as well as keeping workers engaged moving forward.
It’s safe to say that it’s not just what employees are offered in the onboarding process that’s important, but how things are offered as well. The way companies bring new hires into the fold says a lot about how the corporate culture will operate once they settle in. This critical first impression can determine the faith someone puts into their long-term partnership with an employer, and can mean the difference between onboarding success and failure.
Keep the following in mind when creating your plan of action:
Take the long view even if the onboarding process is short-term. It takes a period of time for new hires to reach full productivity, sometimes even months. Make sure your process includes assistance that goes beyond employee orientation, with resources and availability to aid an employee in reaching peak production. If your onboarding consists of impersonal HR videos and reviewing manuals, new employees are likely to be underwhelmed and disengaged.
New employees want to feel like part of the team, so immerse them in your corporate culture on day one. Host a lunch that allows them to interact with members of the team and be sure to take the time to introduce them to their colleagues. Building colleague relationships and involvement in company events go a long way to making a new hire feel as if they’re already contributing. Mentoring programs that pair new hires with experienced employees can also foster peer relationships.
One of the worst ways to lose an employee is for them to feel like the job they’re doing isn’t the one that was promised when hired. 58% of employees claim that the reason they left a job was because their duties were misrepresented to them. Being open and honest saves everyone a lot of headaches down the road, and can save in repeat onboarding expenses for employers.
One way an employer can create onboarding success is by turning to Paycor for assistance. Paycor’s onboarding solution was built to improve new hire engagement, reduce manual administrative work and streamline the process entirely. See how onboarding can help improve your people processes today. Plus, download our checklist to ensure you’re making onboarding a priority on day one and beyond.
Like what you see? Contact us to schedule a demo and see how onboarding can impact your team.
Sources: Elearningindustry.com and Spark Hire
Enter your email below to receive a weekly recap of the latest articles from Paycor’s Resource Center.


Check your inbox for an email confirming your subscription. Enjoy!
 Previous:
Next:
Stay up to date with the latest HR trends

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Employee satisfaction surveys are a great way to stay in tune with what your employees are thinking. Get real insights on how to engage and motivate your team.

        Article      
Read Time: 10 min
Employee burnout can impact work quality and morale. Discover the warning signs for burnout and how to prevent it in your workplace.

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Being an effective leader requires more than just technical knowledge. Create an environment where everyone can thrive and understand emotions in oneself and others.
HCM Software
HR + Payroll Software
Talent Management
Workforce Management
Employee Experience
Benefits Administration
Quick Links
Services + Support
855-565-3285
Talk to Sales
855-752-8564
© 2023 Paycor, Inc  |  Refer Paycor  |  Privacy Policy  |  1-800-501-9462 |
*Represents approximately 30,000 corporate clients covering 40,000 businesses employing people