Remote Work Equipment Checklist

Much of America is now working remotely and some may never return to the office. Prepare your workforce by using this checklist.

Ensure your team is equipped for a productive remote work environment.
Download Your 
                                   Free Copy 

DOWNLOADS:  195 And Counting...!
Your Team’s Remote Work Essentials List
Equipment for Working Remotely
As we experience a winter surge, and businesses prioritize workforce safety, many employees face a winter of remote work. This year has been a learning experience in many ways, and one thing it’s shown us is that to stay productive and engaged while away from the office, employees need the right equipment. It’s time for companies to consider whether they are giving their people all the tools they need.
Providing Remote Work Equipment for Employees
Back in spring, many Americans suddenly found themselves unexpectedly working from home. With limited time to prepare, employees have often found themselves getting by with just a laptop and an internet connection.
But for remote work to be sustainable long-term, businesses need to consider providing employees with more equipment. Great work requires great tools and if companies are going to be productive in a remote work environment, they need their employees to at least be comfortable.
Of course, everyone understands that this is an extraordinary situation that businesses were unable to plan for. But even in this tough economy, if extra equipment can help employees become more productive and engaged, it’ll be worth the expense.
For some roles, a printer or scanner may prove essential, if employees don’t have these in their homes already. If a remote worker is required to handle and store many documents, a file cabinet could prove valuable. For important documents, a fire-safe box may be required. Other less essential, but still useful, items include paper shredders, electrical multi-outlets and surge protectors.
For offline communication, employees may require a supply of stationary like notepad and pens, post-it notes and letter-headed paper with envelopes. After getting used to a seemingly infinite supply of these at the office, it could prove frustrating for employees to have to purchase themselves.
Remote Work Equipment Checklist
It takes a lot of equipment to fully replicate the office experience from home. Nobody expects companies to provide employees with every item on the list. However, every piece of equipment that is provided can make remote work more productive, enjoyable and sustainable.
NEXT:
NEXT: