How to Create a Shift Swapping Policy

It's not unusual for employees to need to change work shifts. Read these 4 tips on creating an effective shift swapping policy for your organization.

Employee Experience
Last Updated:  August 28, 2019 | Read Time: 4 min
In a survey of retail managers conducted by scheduling technology company WorkJam, 62% said they had sales associates quit due to ongoing scheduling conflicts. It’s important to your company’s retention efforts that, if you have shift workers, you fully understand that sometimes “life happens” and your employees will occasionally need to switch up their schedules.
Of course, companies need consistency and dependability when scheduling staff, and employees also need the flexibility to adapt to the demands of life with doctor’s visits, kids, spouses and aging parents. But these requirements don’t necessarily have to work against each other. A well-thought-out shift swapping policy can work for both sides and help ensure that both the company and its employees get the staff scheduling they need.
Pro Tip: Every employee handbook should have a section on shift swapping policies. Don’t have a handbook? Here’s are 8 reasons why you should consider building one.
In 2017, Center for WorkLife Law partnered with clothing retailer The Gap to understand if mobile scheduling systems, mostly controlled by employees, would work for the company. WorkLife Law gave study participants at some Gap locations access to a smart phone app that enabled employees to offer shifts they couldn’t work into a pool. Other workers could snag the shifts on a first-come, first-served basis without manager approval.
During the more than six-month trial period, over 60% of The Gap’s employees used the new app. To the company’s surprise, nearly 50% of workers who were aged 50+ used the app to swap shifts. Ninety-five percent of the company’s part-time employees said that having the ability to exchange shifts helped them modify their work schedules around their personal lives, while 97% applauded the system for aiding them in securing more hours when they needed them.
Need a time and attendance system that delivers results? Paycor’s shift swapping system allows employees to drop, pick up or request shift changes in real time. With intuitive drag and drop functionality, you can assign shifts and publish schedules with only a few clicks.

 Previous:
Next:
Stay up to date with the latest HR trends

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Employee satisfaction surveys are a great way to stay in tune with what your employees are thinking. Get real insights on how to engage and motivate your team.

        Article      
Read Time: 10 min
Employee burnout can impact work quality and morale. Discover the warning signs for burnout and how to prevent it in your workplace.

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Being an effective leader requires more than just technical knowledge. Create an environment where everyone can thrive and understand emotions in oneself and others.
HCM Software
HR + Payroll Software
Talent Management
Workforce Management
Employee Experience
Benefits Administration
Quick Links
Services + Support
855-565-3285
Talk to Sales
855-752-8564
© 2023 Paycor, Inc  |  Refer Paycor  |  Privacy Policy  |  1-800-501-9462 |
*Represents approximately 30,000 corporate clients covering 40,000 businesses employing people