2019 HR & Compliance Web Summit: Executive Summary

If you weren't able to join Paycor's recent web summit, we've got you covered. View the summary and get links to view recorded webinars here.

Workforce Management
Last Updated:  October 17, 2019 | Read Time: 15 min
With 20,000+ registrations, this was Paycor’s biggest and best web summit yet!
Industry experts like Jennifer McClure offered actionable insights and advice on all things HR, from self-care for the HR pro to in-the-news compliance issues. If you missed the live webinars you can watch them on our on-demand webinar page.
In the meantime, here’s a quick overview of each session.
In today’s business environment only 20% of HR professionals interact with the executive suite. Lori Kleiman says it’s time to stop waiting for your gold embroidered invitation and finally take your seat on the leadership team. Ready to become a strategic HR leader? Follow this 5 step plan:
For more advice on how you can become a strategic HR leader watch the on-demand webinar here.
With the ever-increasing demands of work and life, it’s more crucial than ever to prioritize self-care, and that includes HR leaders. Jennifer McClure covers 5 key self-care areas for HR pros.
Meditation – Every day take 2 minutes to stop whatever you’re doing and concentrate on breathing. Even a short mindful break can result in a calmer happier you.
Conscious Act of Kindness – At the start of every day, send a short email or text praising someone you know. Our brains become addicted to feeling good by making others feel good.
Deepen Social Connections – Spend time with family and friends. Our social connections are one of the best predictors for success and health, and even life expectancy.
Are you up-to-date with Wage and Hour? This session gave attendees an overview of the Department of Labor’s Wage and Hour Division – what it does, and what you as an employer need to do to keep on top of important issues.
Amy reports that laws were passed just this month making changes to FLSA for 2020. Here’s what you need to know:
Want to learn more around wage and hour? Watch the full on-demand session here.
In this session, the Paycor Compliance Team examines how the 2020 Form W-4 is evolving and what you must do to remain complaint.
Why is there a new form?
Why aren’t there allowances?
Here are the responsibilities of employers and employees:
Key Changes to Employee’s Withholding Certificate:
To stay up-to-date with the 2020 Form W-4, watch the full on-demand webinar here.
The most successful HR teams map people management metrics to business outcomes. And that gets the C-suite to pay attention.
In this session, Paycor’s Tim Ruge shares 3 areas where metrics can make a difference, and which metrics can solve these challenging questions:
Can we find good, quality people?
Metric: Referral Rate
How much is it going to cost to recruit and hire them?
Metric: Cost-per-Hire
How much are employee absences costing us?
Metric: Total Financial Impact of Absences
Are we overspending on labor?
Metric: Total Labor Costs
Are we compensating employees correctly based on market rates?
Metric: Actual Total Compensation vs. Budget
Do we have hiring issues or managing issues?
Metric: Voluntary Turnover Rate
Where are we losing the most employees?
Metric: Turnover by Segment
If you’re interested in learning about the power of HR metrics, watch the full on-demand webinar here.
In this session, Katherine Weber unpacks the imposing array of federal, state and local laws that must be considered when designing lawful and effective PTO and paid leave policies.
Katherine says there are many state level leave laws you may not know about, including:
Is your organization making changes to your PTO and paid leave policies? Watch the full on-demand webinar to remain complaint.
To attract and retain quality talent our speakers say you must have a recruiting process that provides an excellent candidate experience.
To gauge your current candidate experience, test your process! Have you identified strengths and opportunities? Are you surveying candidates? If not, you now have a place to start.
Here are some areas your survey should cover:
To improve your candidate experience, here are just a few recommendations from Melissa and Melinda:
This session offers dozens of tips and tricks you can implement today to improve your candidate experience. If you’d like to learn more, watch the full on-demand session here.
In this session, Jamie Bierman explores the basic pillars of workplace behavior, how to encourage them, build a culture of civility and retain your workforce.
Jamie says the key to synergy in the workplace is ensuring employees have a voice. Here’s some tips to get you started:
Don’t wait for problems to happen. Promote synergy from day one by hosting orientation! Here’s what you should include:
Looking to promote synergy in your workplace? Watch the on-demand session here.
In this compliance session, Paycor’s Brett Beilfuss reviews the 4 major areas of compliance: recruiting, hiring, payroll and people management.
Who does it affect?
Potential Impact:
Questions to Consider:
Who does it affect?
Potential Impact:
Questions to Consider:
Who does it affect?
Potential Impact:
Questions to consider:
Who does it affect?
Potential Impact:
Questions to Consider:
To dive deeper into these compliance issues, watch the full, on-demand webinar here.

 Previous:
Next:
Stay up to date with the latest HR trends

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Employee satisfaction surveys are a great way to stay in tune with what your employees are thinking. Get real insights on how to engage and motivate your team.

        Article      
Read Time: 10 min
Employee burnout can impact work quality and morale. Discover the warning signs for burnout and how to prevent it in your workplace.

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Being an effective leader requires more than just technical knowledge. Create an environment where everyone can thrive and understand emotions in oneself and others.
HCM Software
HR + Payroll Software
Talent Management
Workforce Management
Employee Experience
Benefits Administration
Quick Links
Services + Support
855-565-3285
Talk to Sales
855-752-8564
© 2023 Paycor, Inc  |  Refer Paycor  |  Privacy Policy  |  1-800-501-9462 |
*Represents approximately 30,000 corporate clients covering 40,000 businesses employing people