Age Discrimination in the Workplace

Ageism should be avoided in the workplace. Organizations that don't comply with protecting individuals over 40, could be at risk.

Talent Management
Last Updated:  September 3, 2019 | Read Time: 4 min
Do they ask for “a recent graduate,” a person “with 1-3 years of experience,” a “digital native” or worst of all, someone who would be a great fit for your “young and cool” team? Do you have an age requirement for certain jobs (excluding businesses that sell alcohol and require the person to be at least 21 years old, of course)? If so, your company could be headed to the courtroom to defend itself against an age discrimination lawsuit.
In 1967, President Lyndon Johnson passed the Age Discrimination in Employment Act (ADEA), which is designed to protect job candidates and employees 40 and up from age discrimination in the workplace. While it doesn’t shield people who are under 40 years old, some jurisdictions do have laws on the books that do offer protection to younger workers. The ADEA was a positive step to protect workers’ rights, but age discrimination (whether intentional or unintentional) is still happening in every industry and job sector today.
Unfortunately for people over the age of 40, a 2009 Supreme Court decision weakened the ADEA. The ruling made it much more difficult for job candidates or employees to demonstrate that they’ve been discriminated against because of their age as opposed to those who allege they’ve been discriminated against due to their race, gender or religion. Even though Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC) attorneys found reasonable cause to pursue only 3.1% of claims on average, it’s still important to ensure that your internal policies and practices aren’t discriminatory against older employees.
The ADEA applies to, “private employers with 20 or more employees, state and local governments, employment agencies, labor organizations, and the federal government.”
The law prohibits harassment and age discrimination in every part of the employment lifecycle including:
Harassment can include offensive or insulting comments referring to a person’s age, such as a manager repeatedly calling an older employee “over the hill” or saying they’re “behind the times.” The law doesn’t forbid playful banter, for example several team members joking around at an in-office birthday party. The behavior becomes harassment and discriminatory when the remarks are so unyielding that it creates a hostile work environment, or it results in the employee being demoted or even fired.
Every state has their own age discrimination policies that apply to employers with fewer employees than the 20 required by the federal law.
Most forms of harassment in the workplace are overt and easy to identify. Age discrimination can be more subtle such as in the job description phrases we mentioned above. Another example: Say your company has a group layoff that affects a majority of your over-40 employees and leaves behind those who are under 40 and make less money. This action could be viewed as discriminatory.
The language you use in your employee handbook can be as simple and inclusive as this:
[COMPANY NAME] is committed to a diverse workforce, and it is our policy to provide an equal employment opportunity to all candidates and employees.
We do not discriminate against anyone based on race, ethnicity, religion, gender, sexual orientation, disability, age or any other characteristic protected under federal, state or local law. Any reports of discrimination are taken very seriously. They will be investigated, and disciplinary measures will be taken.
Maintaining compliance is essential for employers to prevent crippling liability. The best way to mitigate risk is with a knowledgeable partner. Paycor is proud to keep more than 30,000 organizations informed and compliant with federal and state laws and regulations. Talk to a Paycor representative to learn how we can help you avoid fines and penalties.
The information provided is for educational purposes only; it is not legal advice. Always check regulations to help ensure compliance.

 Previous:
Next:
Stay up to date with the latest HR trends

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Employee satisfaction surveys are a great way to stay in tune with what your employees are thinking. Get real insights on how to engage and motivate your team.

        Article      
Read Time: 10 min
Employee burnout can impact work quality and morale. Discover the warning signs for burnout and how to prevent it in your workplace.

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Being an effective leader requires more than just technical knowledge. Create an environment where everyone can thrive and understand emotions in oneself and others.
HCM Software
HR + Payroll Software
Talent Management
Workforce Management
Employee Experience
Benefits Administration
Quick Links
Services + Support
855-565-3285
Talk to Sales
855-752-8564
© 2023 Paycor, Inc  |  Refer Paycor  |  Privacy Policy  |  1-800-501-9462 |
*Represents approximately 30,000 corporate clients covering 40,000 businesses employing people