How To Terminate Well Liked Employee

It may be time to terminate employment, but because this employee is so well liked by their coworkers, you need to be prepared

Employee Experience
Last Updated:  February 16, 2016 | Read Time: 3 min
Picture this. Eight years ago you hired an extremely talented, energetic
individual who quickly became a source of enthusiasm and expertise in
your workplace. A friend to everyone, this star employee excelled in
their work, acing every performance review; until recently.
About six months ago, this individual developed a snooty attitude with
management. Regular absences and tardiness soon followed. Projects
weren’t completed when they needed to be. Those that got done were
usually done poorly. You put the employee on a progressive discipline
plan in accordance with your policy, hoping to see a return to their
longtime stellar performance, but the employee showed no interest in
improving.
It may be time to terminate employment, but because this employee is so
well liked by their coworkers, you need to be prepared for the
ramifications of letting them go.
Prepare for the fallout of terminating the individual. The employee has
built up a lot of relationship capital. You should expect the employees
closest to this person to be very upset. Some of them might even want to
quit. You’ll need to meet with these individuals, listen to their
concerns, and try to help them adjust to the abrupt change.
While this employee isn’t in management, colleagues may go to them for
mentoring, guidance, and direction. You can expect some of these
colleagues to be a tad aimless following the termination. Keep your eyes
open for employees who look a little lost and offer to help them with
whatever they need.
Third, because this employee was once very good at their job—and may
still appear to be so—people in the office might fear that they’ll be
let go next. You can reassure them without violating confidentiality by
being openly appreciative of everyone’s contributions. Even small words
of encouragement said here and there can put people’s minds to rest.
If you suspect that the fallout of the termination could be very
disruptive to business operations, and you haven’t terminated others for
the same cause, you may want to consider alternatives to termination,
such as reassignment to a different manager.
But if you’ve decided termination is the best path forward, you’ll need
to prepare for the likely consequences. Don’t wait to see what happens.
Take proactive steps to ensure that upset employees are heard, aimless
employees are guided, and anxious employees are reassured. The road will
be rocky, but you can help smooth the way by addressing these issues
before they significantly disrupt your workflow.
Terminating a long-time employee can be a big change for any
organization, but dealing with the change in an effective and
responsible manner will lessen the impact of the decision. Have
questions about how to properly terminate an employee at your
organization? An entire year of HR Support Center
On-Demand
is cheaper than one hour of a typical attorney’s time. Ask
us
instead.
Additional Resources:
See our best
practices
for termination
Learn 5 tips for successful performance
counseling
Source: HR Support Center
 Previous:
Next:
Stay up to date with the latest HR trends

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Employee satisfaction surveys are a great way to stay in tune with what your employees are thinking. Get real insights on how to engage and motivate your team.

        Article      
Read Time: 10 min
Employee burnout can impact work quality and morale. Discover the warning signs for burnout and how to prevent it in your workplace.

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Being an effective leader requires more than just technical knowledge. Create an environment where everyone can thrive and understand emotions in oneself and others.
HCM Software
HR + Payroll Software
Talent Management
Workforce Management
Employee Experience
Benefits Administration
Quick Links
Services + Support
855-565-3285
Talk to Sales
855-752-8564
© 2023 Paycor, Inc  |  Refer Paycor  |  Privacy Policy  |  1-800-501-9462 |
*Represents approximately 30,000 corporate clients covering 40,000 businesses employing people