Employee Exit Interview Questions Checklist

Conducting exit interviews is a good way to obtain candid insights on the organization. Access a free list of exit interview questions, here.

Employee Experience
Last Updated: October 15, 2020 | Read Time: 6 min
The longer an employee’s tenure, the more they learn about how the company really works. This means, strange as it might seem, they’ll never be able to offer more valuable insights than on the day they leave. That’s why it’s good practice to conduct exit interviews—departing employees offer a unique perspective and may well be more candid than during their employment. Employers have a great chance to learn about their own organization—but only if they ask the right questions.
When an employee leaves your company, it can be tempting to get them out the door and move on as quickly as possible. However, every departure is a learning opportunity—no matter the reason they are leaving—and the most valuable takeaways can often come from the employee themselves.
Conducting exit interviews gives you a chance to collect insights at the only time when an employee has no reason to hold back, unlike an ordinary check-in. If you’re losing top talent, this is a chance to find out why and potentially uncover a toxic culture before it’s too late. Even if the employee wasn’t a key member of the team, they’ll likely still have useful experiences to share.
Conducting an exit interview effectively takes skill and practice. You want to create an environment where the departing employee feels comfortable offering their honest opinions—for this reason, it’s better that the interviewer is from your HR team, rather than an employee’s direct supervisor. Hold the interview somewhere private, and as close as possible to the last hour of the employee’s last day.
Reassure the employee that their answers will be confidential and that the purpose of the interview is to inform and improve company policy going forward. Take notes, and make sure that the conclusions are acted upon—without follow through, conducting an exit interview is a waste of time.
Most importantly of all, an interviewer shouldn’t be tempted to express their own opinion. This isn’t one last chance to convince an employee to stay, and it definitely isn’t the time to argue with an employee’s answers. If the departure is on unhappy terms and you’re concerned about it becoming an argument (or if you simply can’t find time to schedule an in-person interview), offer the alternative of a written questionnaire which the employee can fill out in their own time.
The challenge of an exit interview is focusing in on the most relevant topics and gleaning actionable insights from a chat that is likely to last an hour or less. You probably won’t have time to discuss an employee’s entire history with the company, so targeted questions are key.
Some key areas to discuss are:
Exit interviews provide great learning opportunities—but only if you ask the right questions. To help businesses, Paycor is providing a checklist of employee exit interview questions.
Javascript is required to interact with this content.
 Previous:
Next:
Stay up to date with the latest HR trends
HCM Software
HR + Payroll Software
Talent Management
Workforce Management
Employee Experience
Benefits Administration
Quick Links
Services + Support
855-565-3285
Talk to Sales
855-752-8564
© 2023 Paycor, Inc  |  Refer Paycor  |  Privacy Policy  |  1-800-501-9462 |
*Represents approximately 30,000 corporate clients covering 40,000 businesses employing people