Benefits Administration: A Guide for HR Leaders

The benefits plan selected for your workforce impacts employee performance, retention and profits. Get actionable tips to administering your benefits program.

Benefits Administration
Last Updated:  February 10, 2020 | Read Time: 14 min
Believe it or not, your benefits package can have a serious impact on your ability to recruit, engage and retain talent. Hard to believe? It shouldn’t be. SHRM reports more than 50% of U.S. job candidates say benefits are among their top considerations before accepting a job. That’s why selecting the right benefits package is one of the most important things you’ll do for your employees over the life of your business. Choose the right benefits and your employees might never want to leave. Offer the wrong ones… you might as well install a revolving door.


Whether you’re aiming to boost your employees’ overall performance or you’re looking to improve satisfaction and retention, benefits can be a powerful tool. In fact, research shows that businesses with a strategic benefits program have higher overall performance and retention rates than those that don’t.
Unfortunately, selecting the right benefits mix is not a “cut and paste” proposition, as there is no one-size-fits-all solution. Your workforce is diverse, it may very well be multigenerational, and so your employees will need and want different options.

(and some others to consider)
So, we’ve established that benefits matter, but which benefits should you offer? At the foundation, employees want benefits that cover their healthcare expenses and future retirement funds. This includes:
Looking to add or switch providers? You typically have four options: HMO, PPO, POS and HAS.
Read more about these options here.
Fully Funded Employer Plans:
The business covers 100% of employees’ costs.
Partially Funded Employer Plans:
The business shares the costs with its employees. Most of the time in the ballpark of an 80/20 employer/employee split.
Fully Funded Employee Plans:
Employees pay the entire cost of their dental insurance while the business pays the payroll deductions and administrative costs.
Here’s why employees love this option:
If your company can offer a benefit like a 401(k), with an employer match, it can be a valuable tool for recruiting and retaining talent.
Learn more about 401(k) options here.
Keep in mind that most of your competitors also have these benefits. So how can you stand out from the crowd? You need to design your benefits plan to be inclusive of a diverse workforce (we’ll get to that next) by offering traditional and non-traditional benefits. Non-traditional benefits that most employees appreciate include perks such as working remotely, paid time off to volunteer, allowing pets in the office, paid gym memberships, or free snacks and drinks.

Your employees don’t all fit in the same box. With five generations composing today’s workforce, your employees have different expectations for what benefits they’ll be offered. When you have to manage these expectations, a cookie-cutter benefits program simply won’t cut it.


 The Silent Generation (1928-1945)
The Silent Generation makes up only 2% of the active workforce.
This group mostly cares about financial benefits and recognition programs, such as:
 Baby Boomers (1946-1964)
Not only do Baby Boomers make up 25% of the workforce, but they also typically sit in high-level positions. Keeping this generation satisfied means you’re retaining your most loyal and experienced talent.
This generation cares about:
 Gen X (1965-1980)
Gen X-ers make up 32% of the workforce. As an experienced group, this generation is focused on career advancements.
Benefits they care about include:
Millennials & Gen Z or Post-Millennials (1981-1996 & 1997-present)
Together, Millennials and Gen Z make up more than 40% of the workforce (Millennials 35%, Gen Z 6%). To this generation, financial benefits are a big plus, but they also care about work-life balance and other non-traditional benefits.
This generation cares about:

Wells Tower Watson reports that companies with higher levels of wellbeing achieve a 2x level of employee engagement.
As benefits become more aligned to company culture, we’re seeing organizations look for ways to holistically engage their employees with programs geared toward physical, mental and social health.

You’ll find seemingly endless options when you’re exploring employee benefits. But one of the biggest choices to make is deciding if you want to use a benefits broker. If the answer is “YES!” the second biggest decision you’ll need to make is which broker you’ll partner with for benefits administration. Your leadership team has high expectations, but no one expects you to be an expert on how to navigate the complex and often-confusing world of benefits. That’s why finding the right broker match is important for your organization.
As you begin researching and interviewing potential brokers, be sure to ask:

Simply put, finding the right HR benefits technology will significantly improve your work life. But deciding which benefit admin provider you want to partner with can quickly become overwhelming. From ACA and rising health care costs to open enrollment and plan selection, employers are faced with a lot of decisions.
Choosing a benefits administration provider isn’t a simple task but knowing what to look for can improve your chance of finding the right solution for your business.  See how Paycor’s Benefits Advisor transforms open enrollment and simplifies the complexity of benefits.
 Previous:
Next:
Stay up to date with the latest HR trends

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Employee satisfaction surveys are a great way to stay in tune with what your employees are thinking. Get real insights on how to engage and motivate your team.

        Article      
Read Time: 10 min
Employee burnout can impact work quality and morale. Discover the warning signs for burnout and how to prevent it in your workplace.

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Being an effective leader requires more than just technical knowledge. Create an environment where everyone can thrive and understand emotions in oneself and others.
HCM Software
HR + Payroll Software
Talent Management
Workforce Management
Employee Experience
Benefits Administration
Quick Links
Services + Support
855-565-3285
Talk to Sales
855-752-8564
© 2023 Paycor, Inc  |  Refer Paycor  |  Privacy Policy  |  1-800-501-9462 |
*Represents approximately 30,000 corporate clients covering 40,000 businesses employing people