Pay Equity: What It Is And Why It’s Important

Even in the modern era of 2021, workers are exposed to pay inequities due to gender and race. Inform yourself with the facts and laws on pay equity.

Workforce Management
Last Updated: December 2, 2020 | Read Time: 6 min
Pay equity is a method of eliminating gender and race discrimination when establishing and maintaining wages. Still today, many workers are separated into various jobs which are historically underpaid because of their gender or race.
Federal pay equity laws have been in existence for decades, but over the past few years, states and local municipalities have begun to closely examine their own laws in an effort to close the gender pay gap. Nearly all states have equal pay laws, but many were enacted some time ago and lack any emphasis on discriminatory pay practices. California, Colorado, New York, Maryland and Massachusetts are examples of states that have strengthened their laws, and in September 2019, Alabama became the 49th state to adopt equal pay legislation (Mississippi is the only holdout). But even as momentum picks up at the state and local levels, movement on the federal level lags behind.
In 2021, California will become the first state requiring employees to submit employee pay data by gender and race.
Numerous laws exist today to protect workers from wage discrimination. Two of the most significant are the Equal Pay Act of 1963 and Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964.
The Equal Pay Act of 1963 states that men and women must be given equal pay for equal work in the same establishment. According to the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC), it’s job content, not job titles, that determines if jobs are equal. The Equal Pay Act (EPA) was created as an amendment to the Fair Labor Standards Act, and because the EPA is related to the FLSA’s wage laws, most of the same coverage and exemption rules that apply to the FLSA also apply to the EPA.
Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 prohibits wage discrimination on the basis of race, color, sex, religion or national origin. Title VII is broader than the EPA, allowing claims for any type of discrimination, whereas the EPA is limited to unequal pay between men and women for substantially equal work. Additionally, a 1981 Supreme Court ruling established that claims for wage discrimination between men and women that did not quite fit under the EPA could be brought under Title VII. Title VII has “a more relaxed standard of similarity between jobs.”[1] However, unlike the EPA, Title VII requires proof of discriminatory intent.

Today, one of the most frequently discussed topics in pay equity policy revolves around whether employers should be mandated to provide employee pay data directly to the government. Employers with 100 or more employees have been required to submit information to the EEOC, including the gender, race and ethnic makeup of employees by job category ((Component 2 data). Armed with this additional data, the EEOC could work to enforce gender discrimination laws and investigate any pay discrimination charges. Legal fights over collection meant that collection of previous years’ data was delayed until early 2020.
Due to the pandemic, the deadline for submissions of EEO-1 data on the employee numbers sorted by job category, gender, ethnicity and race (Component 1 data), was delayed till March 31, 2021.
On the same data, California’s own pay data reporting bill—SB 973—goes into effect. This will require companies with 100 or more employees to submit employee data relevant to many different categories, including sex.
When reporting time comes, it’s critical that you have the right technology to help you efficiently gather and report on the employee data you need. Paycor can help you streamline data collection with unified HR, payroll and time solutions that don’t require duplicate entry or file imports.
As with any new compliance regulation or update to a current law, we will provide the latest information so you can prepare for what’s required. View our compliance section for best practices and insights on compliance along with the latest articles on recruiting, benefits, people management and employee engagement.
More than 30,000 medium-sized and small businesses trust Paycor to help them manage their most valuable asset—their people. Paycor’s personalized support and user-friendly, scalable technology streamlines every aspect of people management, giving our clients the peace of mind to focus on what they know best, their business and their mission.
To speak to our expert team about how we can help you stay ahead of compliance regulations, contact us today.

 Previous:
Next:
Stay up to date with the latest HR trends

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Employee satisfaction surveys are a great way to stay in tune with what your employees are thinking. Get real insights on how to engage and motivate your team.

        Article      
Read Time: 10 min
Employee burnout can impact work quality and morale. Discover the warning signs for burnout and how to prevent it in your workplace.

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Being an effective leader requires more than just technical knowledge. Create an environment where everyone can thrive and understand emotions in oneself and others.
HCM Software
HR + Payroll Software
Talent Management
Workforce Management
Employee Experience
Benefits Administration
Quick Links
Services + Support
855-565-3285
Talk to Sales
855-752-8564
© 2023 Paycor, Inc  |  Refer Paycor  |  Privacy Policy  |  1-800-501-9462 |
*Represents approximately 30,000 corporate clients covering 40,000 businesses employing people