4 Skills You Need to Run a Profitable Restaurant Business

##**Running a Restaurant is Not for the Faint of Heart**

Running a restaurant isn’t something anyone does for easy profits. Sixty-percent of restaurants (an...

Employee Experience
Last Updated:  January 9, 2020 | Read Time: 6 min
Running a restaurant isn’t something anyone does for easy profits. Sixty-percent of restaurants (and in some regions, 90%) fail within their first year, according to Philip B. Stark of the University of California, Berkeley. Even when everything works, industry profit margins are typically stuck in the low single digits (National Restaurant Association).
So, are restaurant entrepreneurs crazy? No. After all, someone’s turning a profit. Restaurant industry sales are set to exceed a record $863 billion in 2019 (that’s 3.6% year-on-year growth). Consumer confidence is so strong that the National Restaurant Association’s 2019 annual report refers to it as “pent-up demand.” People still love the dining experience, there’s demand out there… but what does it take to earn that priceless consumer loyalty?
This sort of added pressure on your budget can decimate a healthy profit. And if your only solution is to pass these rising costs onto consumers, or cut quality, don’t expect customer loyalty to see you through.
However, no matter how creative your menus, your restaurant is only ever as successful as its marketing. Reviews matter, but they need to be combined with a proactive social media strategy. Forty-five percent of American diners have been persuaded to try a new restaurant thanks to social media, according to marketing agency MGH – and if you aren’t part of the conversation, you’re limiting your potential, and your profits.
All the skills needed to run a profitable restaurant business don’t always need to come together in one person. In many restaurants, these responsibilities will be shared between many employees. But the core challenge remains – creating a memorable yet affordable customer experience in the face of rising costs, high staff turnover and unprecedented industry competition.
Since 1990, Paycor has partnered with restaurants to drive down turnover, make scheduling and timekeeping both easy and accurate and stay ahead of the tax and compliance curve. Learn how Paycor can help you solve problems and grow.

 Previous:
Next:
Stay up to date with the latest HR trends

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Employee satisfaction surveys are a great way to stay in tune with what your employees are thinking. Get real insights on how to engage and motivate your team.

        Article      
Read Time: 10 min
Employee burnout can impact work quality and morale. Discover the warning signs for burnout and how to prevent it in your workplace.

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Being an effective leader requires more than just technical knowledge. Create an environment where everyone can thrive and understand emotions in oneself and others.
HCM Software
HR + Payroll Software
Talent Management
Workforce Management
Employee Experience
Benefits Administration
Quick Links
Services + Support
855-565-3285
Talk to Sales
855-752-8564
© 2023 Paycor, Inc  |  Refer Paycor  |  Privacy Policy  |  1-800-501-9462 |
*Represents approximately 30,000 corporate clients covering 40,000 businesses employing people