5 Best Practices for Strategic Labor Management

Learn how to improve your strategic labor management practices by putting the right processes and safeguards in place.

Workforce Management
Last Updated:  April 23, 2019 | Read Time: 4 min
Ineffective labor management is one of the top money wasters in most businesses. From unmanaged overtime to underutilized employees, not managing your labor properly can cost your organization an arm and a leg.
To help your company become more strategic on labor management, consider these five best practices:
It might sound like a no brainer but having the right employees on your team is a huge step toward a thriving business. Make sure your hiring process is designed to bring in high-quality, engaged employees. Disengaged employees are a burden to profits and cost an average of one-and-a-half times their salary to replace. You can’t afford to neglect employee engagement.

For instance, if an employee misrepresents his/her hours, you can still be held accountable for those overtime expenses. Which is why it’s important to keep detailed records of any times you and the employee disputed hours worked because you’ll need the documentation to prove your side of the story.
To be more strategic about your labor management, make sure you have highly engaged employees following an efficient process to make your organization as effective as possible. Partnering with the right HR partner and using time and attendance solutions to accurately track hours worked and overtime will help protect your company from potential wage lawsuits and mitigate HR compliance risk.

 Previous:
Next:
Stay up to date with the latest HR trends

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Employee satisfaction surveys are a great way to stay in tune with what your employees are thinking. Get real insights on how to engage and motivate your team.

        Article      
Read Time: 10 min
Employee burnout can impact work quality and morale. Discover the warning signs for burnout and how to prevent it in your workplace.

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Being an effective leader requires more than just technical knowledge. Create an environment where everyone can thrive and understand emotions in oneself and others.
HCM Software
HR + Payroll Software
Talent Management
Workforce Management
Employee Experience
Benefits Administration
Quick Links
Services + Support
855-565-3285
Talk to Sales
855-752-8564
© 2023 Paycor, Inc  |  Refer Paycor  |  Privacy Policy  |  1-800-501-9462 |
*Represents approximately 30,000 corporate clients covering 40,000 businesses employing people