6 Tips for Celebrating the Holidays with a Multi-Cultural Workforce

In a multi-cultural workplace, employees will have unique needs for their holiday celebrations and  observations. Read Paycor’s article on tips for celebrating. 

Employee Experience
Last Updated: November 22, 2021 | Read Time: 5 min
Back in the day, it was exceedingly common for businesses to have Christmas parties, give out Christmas bonuses, and send out Christmas wishes to their employees. Today’s workforce is becoming increasingly more diverse, and those changes have an impact on the holiday season. Now, depending on where December falls in the lunar calendar, other cultural holidays can include:
To keep from alienating employees and to help manage the variety of holidays and celebrations that accompany the end of the year, here are a few tips to keep in mind.
 Remember, the holidays are meant to be a time for friends and family; a season of happiness and giving. Holiday celebrations and decorations should enrich the spirit of the season, not detract from it.
For more free resources and tools that promote DE&I best practices in the workplace, visit Perspectives+. It’s Paycor’s online knowledge library designed to help our partner network drive change, empower colleagues, and foster new leaders.
 Previous:
Next:
Stay up to date with the latest HR trends

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Employee satisfaction surveys are a great way to stay in tune with what your employees are thinking. Get real insights on how to engage and motivate your team.

        Article      
Read Time: 10 min
Employee burnout can impact work quality and morale. Discover the warning signs for burnout and how to prevent it in your workplace.

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Being an effective leader requires more than just technical knowledge. Create an environment where everyone can thrive and understand emotions in oneself and others.
HCM Software
HR + Payroll Software
Talent Management
Workforce Management
Employee Experience
Benefits Administration
Quick Links
Services + Support
855-565-3285
Talk to Sales
855-752-8564
© 2023 Paycor, Inc  |  Refer Paycor  |  Privacy Policy  |  1-800-501-9462 |
*Represents approximately 30,000 corporate clients covering 40,000 businesses employing people