9 Steps to Having Better Online Meetings

Online meetings aren’t new, but with the rise in remote work, they're more important than ever. See how to make them effective.

Employee Experience
Last Updated: April 29, 2020 | Read Time: 7 min
However the current public health emergency plays out, social distancing isn’t going away any time soon. Online meetings can be frustrating, but they’re going to play a big role in keeping SMBs running smoothly. The good news is, it’s possible for video conferencing to be more productive and enjoyable if you and your employees follow some simple best practices.
The technology is ready. There are several well-established and reliable video conferencing providers to choose from including Zoom and GoTo Meeting. What small business leaders need to do now is to choose the right software for them. Think about your priorities—and consider how these may have changed recently.
For hosts:So, you’ve chosen your software and it’s time to have a meeting. As a host, your first responsibility is to make sure that everyone who needs to be is invited and able to access the meeting. But watch out: you always need to avoid unwanted guests. Don’t post meeting codes publicly and, if possible, require password protection to join.
Before any online meeting, you’ll want to make sure that you’re actually able to communicate—test your connection, microphone and video. To avoid any unwanted communication, set your microphone to mute as default and if you’re in a loud place, use headphones.
Instead, you have to work a little harder to get people relaxed. Start the meeting with a joke or an icebreaker story. It depends on the meeting, but one great way to get everyone involved and in a good mood is to encourage everyone to share a favorite (or funny) photo as their video background.
No matter how relaxed participants are, it can be tough to replicate in-person meetings. Lagging internet connections are the enemy of free-flowing conversation. Instead, a host might need to push a little harder for contributions. It can be helpful to develop a system for whose turn it is to speak—though this can be as simple as agreeing for everyone to wait for their turn. Alternatively, it can also be effective to make use of video conferencing platforms’ more advanced features, like a virtual “hand up” option. Even a basic chat capability can help participants get in line to speak, express agreement (without interrupting) or share links for the group to read later.
Appointing someone to carry out an agenda is helpful to keep any meeting on track, but it’s especially true online. It helps if this person isn’t the main speaker (they should be thinking about what they have to say). Instead, a moderator ensures that everyone is heard, interruptions are kept to a minimum (possibly using the power of selective muting) and the right person is screen sharing.
Online meetings require more concentration than in-person meetings, since it’s so easy to lose focus. This is especially true while working from home—who can follow a speaker with a big pile of laundry in the corner? To avoid this, do your best to find a space without visual distractions.
Many employees never expected to be working remotely, especially with kids at home too. So when a preschooler unexpectedly walks into the shot, this is a moment for some empathy—it can happen to anyone. If the meeting isn’t super urgent, let the parent introduce their child to the group. Varying internet quality is also something that an employee can often not do much about. Don’t be surprised by crackly connections or sudden disappearances from video calls.  
Online meetings can get tiring, no matter how many best practices you follow. SMBs should consider cutting down on the volume of meetings—if that’s not possible, consider splitting meetings into smaller, more manageable groups or even one-on-one calls.
While it’s usually recommended to always use video (it’s much easier to communicate when you can see someone’s face) if employees are facing whole days of online meetings a nice compromise can be to allow audio-only times so everyone can focus solely on what is said, and forget about how they look.
For expert advice and support during this public health emergency, visit Paycor’s Coronavirus Support Center.
Paycor builds HR software for leaders of medium & small business. For 30 years, we’ve been listening to and partnering with leaders, so we know what they need: HCM technology that saves time, powerful analytics and expert HR advice to help them solve problems and achieve their goals.
 Previous:
Next:
Stay up to date with the latest HR trends

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Employee satisfaction surveys are a great way to stay in tune with what your employees are thinking. Get real insights on how to engage and motivate your team.

        Article      
Read Time: 10 min
Employee burnout can impact work quality and morale. Discover the warning signs for burnout and how to prevent it in your workplace.

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Being an effective leader requires more than just technical knowledge. Create an environment where everyone can thrive and understand emotions in oneself and others.
HCM Software
HR + Payroll Software
Talent Management
Workforce Management
Employee Experience
Benefits Administration
Quick Links
Services + Support
855-565-3285
Talk to Sales
855-752-8564
© 2023 Paycor, Inc  |  Refer Paycor  |  Privacy Policy  |  1-800-501-9462 |
*Represents approximately 30,000 corporate clients covering 40,000 businesses employing people