Two Seasonal Employment Laws You Need to Know

Are you an employer hiring for the upcoming holidays or summer break? Be sure you're up to date on the seasonal employment laws. Start here.

Talent Management
Last Updated:  September 30, 2020 | Read Time: 7 min
It hasn’t been an ordinary year, but—believe it or not—we’re approaching the holiday shopping rush and retail businesses are hiring additional staff to handle the increased workload. Seasonal employment gives employers the help they need to get through a busy period without making long-term commitments, and in return workers (often students) get valuable work experience and the chance to earn some extra cash.
Most employment laws, except the Family and Medical Leave Act (FMLA], also apply to seasonal employees. And the federal Fair Labor Standards Act (FLSA)] and state laws require companies to pay their seasonal employees 1 ½ times their regular rate of pay for any hours worked in excess of 40 in a given work week… just like their regular employees. Seasonal employees can also affect your calculations for Affordable Care Act, so it’s important to really keep an eye on their hours.
A clear and persuasive job description will help you attract the best candidates. Your job posting should include:
Here are a few ideas:
For many companies, recruitment may work differently this time round. Our step-by-step guide to remote hiring can help you get off to the best start in challenging circumstances.
So, once you’ve extended job offers, start your hiring process early with a seamless onboarding process:
When the temps you used in previous years come back, have them mentor the new hires. This will help ramp up the newbies quicker.
The Fair Labor Standards Act (FLSA) has different rules when it comes to seasonal employees in certain industries. Employees of an “amusement or recreational establishment, organized camp, or religious or non-profit educational conference center” are exempt from the law’s requirements as long as:
According to the law, amusement or recreational establishments include: beaches, golf courses, swimming pools, boardwalks, stadiums, summer camps, ice skating rinks and zoos. If your business is not one of those eight, you’re out of luck and the law applies to your seasonal employees. This means that you have to abide by minimum wage and overtime requirements, no exceptions.
The FLSA doesn’t require a certain number of work hours to determine full-time or part-time employment; that’s on individual companies to decide. In most companies, any employee who works at least 32 hours in a work week is considered full-time. The FLSA does, however, require most employees (including your temporary workers) to be paid at least the [federal minimum wage](/resource-center/minimum-wage-by-state-and-2018-increases), which is currently $7.25 an hour. If they work more than 40 hours in a single work week, your seasonal employees are also eligible for overtime pay, which is, at minimum, 150% of their regular pay rate.
The Affordable Care Act (ACA) requires applicable large employers (ALEs) to offer health insurance to their full-time employees. Your company is an ALE if you have 50 or more full-time equivalent (FTE) employees.
While the FLSA doesn’t require a certain number of hours to determine full-time status, the ACA does. Under the ACA, employees who work 30-plus hours per week are considered full-time. So, regardless of how you decide the split between full- and part-time, it’s important to understand that the ACA has different rules.
This is no different and it involves your seasonal employees. If your company employs 50 or more FTE workers for 120 days a year or less or for four complete calendar months (they don’t have to be consecutive), and the employees that take you over the threshold of 50 employees are temps, your business is not considered an ALE, so you wouldn’t be subject to the employer mandate.
Everyone’s hoping the holiday period will go smoothly. But businesses can’t ignore their responsibility to keep employees safe—get informed about staying ADA compliant and put a plan in place for what you’ll do if an employee tests positive for COVID-19.
Paying employees can be a tricky business, especially when holiday and overtime pay are in the picture. Paycor can help. Unlike many of our competitors, we don’t sell off-the-shelf technology. Instead, we tailor technology, including payroll software and time and attendance solutions, to your business.

 Previous:
Next:
Stay up to date with the latest HR trends

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Employee satisfaction surveys are a great way to stay in tune with what your employees are thinking. Get real insights on how to engage and motivate your team.

        Article      
Read Time: 10 min
Employee burnout can impact work quality and morale. Discover the warning signs for burnout and how to prevent it in your workplace.

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Being an effective leader requires more than just technical knowledge. Create an environment where everyone can thrive and understand emotions in oneself and others.
HCM Software
HR + Payroll Software
Talent Management
Workforce Management
Employee Experience
Benefits Administration
Quick Links
Services + Support
855-565-3285
Talk to Sales
855-752-8564
© 2023 Paycor, Inc  |  Refer Paycor  |  Privacy Policy  |  1-800-501-9462 |
*Represents approximately 30,000 corporate clients covering 40,000 businesses employing people