Leave of Absence Acceptance Letter Template

Employers need to explain their leave of absence policy and provide acceptance letters to employees. Learn how to execute the policy and get free template here.

Employee Experience
Last Updated: July 9, 2020 | Read Time: 5 min
Every business needs a leave of absence policy that clearly lays out how employees can apply for time away from work, and what the terms of this leave will be. There are many reasons an employee may require a leave of absence from work and while employers usually have the right to reject a request, it’s almost always the right call to allow employees to take leave.
The distress and uncertainty caused by COVID-19 has only made it more important that businesses take an understanding approach to employee welfare, even if they are not eligible for FMLA leave.
Whatever the reason an employee needs some time away from work, it’s important that, when accepting such a request, employers lay out exactly what it means for an employee’s status in the company, their benefits and what is still expected of them.
To make sure employees know exactly what your leave of absence policy is, you’ll want to send a Leave of Absence Acceptance letter, detailing the policies. Here’s what you’ll need to include:

To help businesses, Paycor is sharing a template employers can use to communicate the leave of absence has been granted. It explains how the unpaid leave will affect an employee’s benefits and employment status. Once downloaded, you can easily edit the language as required, in line with your leave of absence policy.
 Previous:
Next:
Stay up to date with the latest HR trends
HCM Software
HR + Payroll Software
Talent Management
Workforce Management
Employee Experience
Benefits Administration
Quick Links
Services + Support
855-565-3285
Talk to Sales
855-752-8564
© 2023 Paycor, Inc  |  Refer Paycor  |  Privacy Policy  |  1-800-501-9462 |
*Represents approximately 30,000 corporate clients covering 40,000 businesses employing people