Developing Creative Incentive Programs for Employees

Rewarding employees is vital and a huge focus area these days with talent shortages everywhere. Read Paycor’s 6 Easy Incentive Ideas to help boast morale. 

Employee Experience
Last Updated: October 5, 2021 | Read Time: 6 min
Raise your hand if you don’t like being recognized for a job well done! Of course, everybody likes a pat on the back when they knock a project out of the ballpark. Making sure you reward employees for positive outcomes is a vital element of employee retention and morale—a huge focus area these days with talent shortages in almost every industry.
Engagement and performance outcomes go hand-in-hand. In 2020, Gallup compared companies in the bottom quarter (least engaged employees) to the top quarter (most engaged employees) and discovered some interesting stuff:
(The Relationship Between Engagement at Work and Organizational Outcomes 2020, Gallup)
If you think your company is teetering on the edge of that bottom quarter, there are six things you can do to motivate your employees, make them feel valued and improve company culture. And don’t worry, the six things are easy.
Ensuring your employees have something to remember their achievements by is an excellent morale booster. In this challenging hiring environment, it’s more important than ever before to keep the employees you have… and keep them happy. Putting an employee incentive program in place can be a great start.   
Paycor helps leaders build winning teams and a big part of that process is recognizing and rewarding talent with career planning, continuous performance feedback, fair market compensation and comprehensive benefits that speak to their individual needs. Learn how Paycor can help the leaders of your organization create a healthy, productive culture that celebrates shared success.
 Previous:
Next:
Stay up to date with the latest HR trends

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Employee satisfaction surveys are a great way to stay in tune with what your employees are thinking. Get real insights on how to engage and motivate your team.

        Article      
Read Time: 10 min
Employee burnout can impact work quality and morale. Discover the warning signs for burnout and how to prevent it in your workplace.

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Being an effective leader requires more than just technical knowledge. Create an environment where everyone can thrive and understand emotions in oneself and others.
HCM Software
HR + Payroll Software
Talent Management
Workforce Management
Employee Experience
Benefits Administration
Quick Links
Services + Support
855-565-3285
Talk to Sales
855-752-8564
© 2023 Paycor, Inc  |  Refer Paycor  |  Privacy Policy  |  1-800-501-9462 |
*Represents approximately 30,000 corporate clients covering 40,000 businesses employing people