Internal Recruiting: What, Why, How and When

Internal recruiting has its pros and cons depending on your situation. Learn the what, why, how, and when for internal recruiting here.

Talent Management
Last Updated:  December 4, 2020 | Read Time: 9 min
Internal recruiting is the process of filling vacancies within a business from its existing workforce. This is unlike external recruiting, when a business looks to fill vacancies from outside. In a year where the recruitment landscape has looked very different, internal recruiting can be a great way to fill roles, fast.
Companies today use internal recruitment to fill roles in their business that are best suited to having an insider’s view or knowledge, as well as encourage loyalty and a sense of progress for employees. Internal recruiting is an important aspect of any business as it can save time, money and resources when compared to recruiting externally.
Types of Internal Recruiting
So, why would you want to hire internally versus looking for talent outside the company? Here are some of the main reasons companies might prefer internal recruiting:
Adversely, why would a company be hesitant to use internal recruiting? Here are some of the most often cited reasons:
Using an internal hiring process can be very beneficial, but doing it at the right time and in the right situation is key. Here are some best practices to ensure your company is in the right place to recruit from within:
Taking into consideration the advantages, disadvantages and best practices outlined above, here is a step-by-step guide for how you might go about implementing an internal recruiting strategy.
 Previous:
Next:
Stay up to date with the latest HR trends

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Employee satisfaction surveys are a great way to stay in tune with what your employees are thinking. Get real insights on how to engage and motivate your team.

        Article      
Read Time: 10 min
Employee burnout can impact work quality and morale. Discover the warning signs for burnout and how to prevent it in your workplace.

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Being an effective leader requires more than just technical knowledge. Create an environment where everyone can thrive and understand emotions in oneself and others.
HCM Software
HR + Payroll Software
Talent Management
Workforce Management
Employee Experience
Benefits Administration
Quick Links
Services + Support
855-565-3285
Talk to Sales
855-752-8564
© 2023 Paycor, Inc  |  Refer Paycor  |  Privacy Policy  |  1-800-501-9462 |
*Represents approximately 30,000 corporate clients covering 40,000 businesses employing people