What Is an Applicant Tracking System (ATS)?

What is an Applicant Tracking System (ATS) and how does it help HR, recruiters, and employers manage and optimize their hiring processes? A quick tutorial.

Talent Management
Last Updated:  March 25, 2020 | Read Time: 5 min
Commonly referred to as an ATS, this product provides a central applicant database, set of processes and collaboration tools to help employers manage recruitment and hiring efforts. From providing applicants a way to apply to jobs online to managing and tracking interview processes, think of applicant tracking systems as supply chain software for hiring.
Applicant tracking systems are also referred to as: ATS, applicant tracking software, hiring software, recruiting software.
Technology designed for HR and recruiting departments to manage and organize internal hiring processes. (Paycor Recruiting is for employers not recruiting agencies).
Technology used by recruiting agencies, executive search firms, and staffing agencies to manage external recruiting projects.
Paycor Recruiting is designed for HR, employers and internal recruiting teams. It’s common for people to use the terms, “applicant tracking system” and “recruiting software” interchangeably, but there are two distinct types of platforms.
Software as a Service (SaaS) applications, also known as cloud-based applications, are products hosted and managed in a datacenter, paid for on a subscription basis and accessed via browser or mobile device over an internet connection. For employers, there are many benefits to be had from adopting the SaaS / cloud model including:
Cloud-based applicant tracking systems like Paycor Recruiting require very little initial and on-going IT support. Once Paycor Recruiting is up and running, our team provides fast, free technical support.
Paycor Recruiting is designed for HR, employers and internal recruiting teams. It’s common for people to use the terms, “applicant tracking system” and “recruiting software” interchangeably, but there are two distinct types of platforms.
When an ATS vendor says their platform can be accessed on a mobile device, they mean that their product can be viewed on a mobile device, but it doesn’t mean that it works well without being frustrating and slow. New responsive design understands what screen size is being used to access the product. With responsive products like Paycor Recruiting, users never have to download or sign into a separate app to use while on the go.
These days you can choose an ATS with every feature known to man. Focus on what’s important. Smart employers realize that the easiest way to hire better people is to simplify the recruiting process.
Finding, interviewing and hiring talented people are the most important challenges growing businesses face. Paycor Recruiting is a software solution designed and built by recruiters for recruiters and HR hiring teams to help you solve your hiring problems and optimize your recruiting process.

 Previous:
Next:
Stay up to date with the latest HR trends

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Employee satisfaction surveys are a great way to stay in tune with what your employees are thinking. Get real insights on how to engage and motivate your team.

        Article      
Read Time: 10 min
Employee burnout can impact work quality and morale. Discover the warning signs for burnout and how to prevent it in your workplace.

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Being an effective leader requires more than just technical knowledge. Create an environment where everyone can thrive and understand emotions in oneself and others.
HCM Software
HR + Payroll Software
Talent Management
Workforce Management
Employee Experience
Benefits Administration
Quick Links
Services + Support
855-565-3285
Talk to Sales
855-752-8564
© 2023 Paycor, Inc  |  Refer Paycor  |  Privacy Policy  |  1-800-501-9462 |
*Represents approximately 30,000 corporate clients covering 40,000 businesses employing people