How to Help Your Clients Prove Their Value to the C-Suite

Brokers in the employee benefits space should be mindful of helping clients become more data driven. See the 6 questions brokers should be asking their clients.

Employee Experience
Last Updated:  October 9, 2019 | Read Time: 2 min
HR professionals are sitting on a goldmine of data, but they’re constantly fighting an uphill battle when it comes to proving their value to the C-suite. For starters, they aren’t data scientists and often lack the support, resources and budget needed to make sense of the data, let alone measure its financial impact.
In 2015, 20% of business leaders trusted HR to use data to anticipate and help fill talent needs. By 2018, that number dropped to only 11%. The problem is twofold: some HR teams (especially if you are a solo practitioner) still spend too much time on transactional HR functions that should be automated. That doesn’t leave a lot of time for much else. Secondly, HR often doesn’t have the tools they need to access or interpret the data.
But there is a way for you to help your clients. We found the most successful HR teams map people management metrics to business outcomes. Measuring the data that matters most to the C-suite makes HR invaluable.
As a trusted advisor, encourage your clients to become more data-driven by digging for key metrics. Check out our infographic to see what 6 questions can help get them started.
 Previous:
Next:
Stay up to date with the latest HR trends

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Employee satisfaction surveys are a great way to stay in tune with what your employees are thinking. Get real insights on how to engage and motivate your team.

        Article      
Read Time: 10 min
Employee burnout can impact work quality and morale. Discover the warning signs for burnout and how to prevent it in your workplace.

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Being an effective leader requires more than just technical knowledge. Create an environment where everyone can thrive and understand emotions in oneself and others.
HCM Software
HR + Payroll Software
Talent Management
Workforce Management
Employee Experience
Benefits Administration
Quick Links
Services + Support
855-565-3285
Talk to Sales
855-752-8564
© 2023 Paycor, Inc  |  Refer Paycor  |  Privacy Policy  |  1-800-501-9462 |
*Represents approximately 30,000 corporate clients covering 40,000 businesses employing people