Managing Human Capital Effectively

More tools are now at your disposal to help with managing human capital. See how technology can impact your HR and HCM processes.

Employee Experience
Last Updated:  June 27, 2018 | Read Time: 8 min
When a corporate ecosystem functions successfully you can bet a well-considered strategy is in place that’s effectively managing the human side of the business.
As technology evolves, more tools have become available to lighten the paperwork load human resource managers find themselves buried under. Using innovative software applications, HR managers can analyze data and inform leadership about workplace trends. As a result, HR professionals are adding value by taking on a more strategic role.
Human Resources covers a lot of organizational territory. Key HR responsibilities include:
Finding, acquiring, and retaining talent are three vital functions of HR. Think about how many pieces of the human capital puzzle that encompasses! When there’s low unemployment (currently at record lows) these tasks are even more challenging. Today’s HR departments are expected to have a recruiting process that attracts qualified candidates from a smaller pool of applicants while appealing to a multigenerational workforce, and developing opportunities that reduce employee turnover in key roles.
Employees and employers agree that accurate and timely payroll is an absolute must. When mistakes are made and employees aren’t paid on time, they’ll become dissatisfied and quick to look for new opportunities. Payroll processing tasks include time tracking, compensation, managing direct deposits, 401(k) contributions, payroll and tax compliance.
Educational and development opportunities are a smart investment. Building an employee’s knowledge and skill set increases the value they bring to the company. Programs that educate employees can be a great way to develop those who show potential for advancement. If you’ve identified gaps in talent you can use training to help address them. Organizations that listen to employees and offer the kinds of professional development programs they desire improve chances of attracting the kind of talent they want while improving retention rates.
Ensuring a company remains in compliance is no small feat. HR managers have to stay informed of changes at the state and federal level, update internal policies to address those changes, and monitor compliance status at all times to protect the company from hefty fines.

Most C-suite executives acknowledge the starring role HR plays in a company’s long-term success. They know that today’s digital economy demands performance tools that can support these critical functions. Decision makers who weigh the implementation costs against projected ROI realize that acquiring the right HCM technology will help them achieve their goals and future-proof their organization.
Many HR processes are currently handled using separate systems that aren’t fully integrated. You don’t want to use a paddle to power a motor boat. Managing the complex, modern-day functions of HR requires advanced technology. Organizations are moving toward systems that simplify everyday tasks and consolidate data so it can be used to identify insights and aid in long-term planning.
Sensitive HR and payroll data requires an emphasis on security. Fortunately, systems are available that provide the level of cybersecurity needed to mitigate risk and protect information.
Systems that capture and unify data improve HCM and assist in closing the talent gap. Using customized reports in the recruiting process can help you determine if an applicant fits an open job description before there’s even a job to fill.
A good gauge of a company’s trajectory can be gleaned by data analysis. Key performance indicators (KPIs) a company can use to measure and improve performance outcomes include:

Feeling valued is a key factor in employee job satisfaction and [company culture].(https://www.paycor.com/resource-center/employee-management-the-secret-to-building-a-great-company-culture) People define value differently. Some employees feel valued through compensation. Others prioritize feedback and achieving performance goals. Still others view benefits like PTO, telecommuting, or professional development opportunities as measures of value.
Social media and online groups give your employees more power than ever before to influence the opinion of others. When they speak highly about their employment to friends, family, and throughout their online network, it strengthens your reputation and impacts future employees and potential customers.
When employees are engaged and feel valued, they’re more likely to produce at a high level and be key contributors within your organization.
Leveraging HR analytic data is a powerful tool to inform decisions and adjust course. When the analysis is positive, data will support continuing well-performing programs and practices. When data tells another story, managers know to take immediate action.
When a company’s strategy is in alignment and the data supports it, performance will inevitably be strong. Consistently analyzing progress toward goals and objectives that are embraced by staff yields positive results.
When KPIs confirm efforts are in alignment outcomes are strong, your company is optimized for success.
There’s no question effectively managing human capital has a significant impact on an organization’s ability to achieve. But you can’t jump ahead. Exceeding company goals and projections begins with effective human capital management. As our workforce evolves companies must adapt and adopt, leveraging available technology that lets them better engage with, manage, develop, and retain the very best talent.
More than 30,000 medium-sized and small businesses trust Paycor to help them manage their most valuable asset, their people. Whether it’s Finance or Operations, every department in your organization can benefit from partnering with Paycor, because our platform modernizes practically every aspect of people management, from the way you recruit, onboard and develop employees, to the way you pay them, retain them and build a company culture.
To learn how we can help extend your reach with the right technology and the most valuable expertise, contact us today.
Enter your email below to receive a weekly recap of the latest articles
from Paycor’s Resource Center.


MktoForms2.loadForm("//app-ab01.marketo.com", "003-JWW-697", 1796);
Check your inbox
for an email confirming your subscription. Enjoy!
 Previous:
Next:
Stay up to date with the latest HR trends

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Employee satisfaction surveys are a great way to stay in tune with what your employees are thinking. Get real insights on how to engage and motivate your team.

        Article      
Read Time: 10 min
Employee burnout can impact work quality and morale. Discover the warning signs for burnout and how to prevent it in your workplace.

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Being an effective leader requires more than just technical knowledge. Create an environment where everyone can thrive and understand emotions in oneself and others.
HCM Software
HR + Payroll Software
Talent Management
Workforce Management
Employee Experience
Benefits Administration
Quick Links
Services + Support
855-565-3285
Talk to Sales
855-752-8564
© 2023 Paycor, Inc  |  Refer Paycor  |  Privacy Policy  |  1-800-501-9462 |
*Represents approximately 30,000 corporate clients covering 40,000 businesses employing people