Paper or Plastic? The Pros and Cons of Paycards

Before deciding to implement a paycard system, employers must weigh the pros and cons. Get the facts your organization needs, here at Paycor.

Employee Experience
Last Updated:  December 20, 2019 | Read Time: 4 min
Paycards are an alternative method of paying employee wages—instead of payment via paper check or direct deposit, an employee’s pay is loaded onto a debit card each pay period. These cards eliminate the need for a traditional bank account and, in some states, can enable companies to go completely paperless when combined with direct deposit. Many employers have implemented a paycard system, but it’s important to weigh the advantages and disadvantages of paycards before making a decision to switch.
Generally, paycard systems work in the following way:
Employer costs depend on the volume of workers using the cards and fees imposed by the bank and the program. Employees may be charged fees including monthly fees, ATM fees and withdrawal fees depending on the program. But choose your provider carefully. Depending on which state your business is in, it may be illegal to charge fees to employees.
Naturally, the mention of so many potential fees has raised red flags surrounding the use of paycards. Because of this challenge, federal law requires businesses to offer at least one other type of payroll distribution (paper check or direct deposit) to its employees.
The case for paper checks
However, despite these criticisms of paycards, they can be an advantageous option for companies that partner with the right provider.
The case for plastic paycards
Paycards can reduce payroll costs for employers and offer a convenient choice for employees. However, it’s important to research your options, understand the associated costs (for you and your employees), and create a plan to introduce the program to employees before you decide to implement paycards. Learn more about Paycor’s employee payment options, including secure and easy-to-use paycards.

 Previous:
Next:
Stay up to date with the latest HR trends

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Employee satisfaction surveys are a great way to stay in tune with what your employees are thinking. Get real insights on how to engage and motivate your team.

        Article      
Read Time: 10 min
Employee burnout can impact work quality and morale. Discover the warning signs for burnout and how to prevent it in your workplace.

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Being an effective leader requires more than just technical knowledge. Create an environment where everyone can thrive and understand emotions in oneself and others.
HCM Software
HR + Payroll Software
Talent Management
Workforce Management
Employee Experience
Benefits Administration
Quick Links
Services + Support
855-565-3285
Talk to Sales
855-752-8564
© 2023 Paycor, Inc  |  Refer Paycor  |  Privacy Policy  |  1-800-501-9462 |
*Represents approximately 30,000 corporate clients covering 40,000 businesses employing people