Nursing Salaries: Averages By Each State

See average salaries for CNAs, LPNs, RNs, Nurse Practitioners, and more. We'll also walk you through educational requirements and typical job duties.

Workforce Management
Last Updated: July 27, 2021 | Read Time: 12 min
As the nursing shortage continues to be a growing hindrance in the healthcare field, it’s important to develop improved ways to recruit, retain and keep nurses more engaged in their jobs.
One concern nurses have expressed about their jobs is the need to develop a practical career path to help them grow in expertise, salary and job satisfaction. Keeping nurses engaged and optimistic about their jobs means helping them map out a course to success. Nursing is an extremely diverse and specialized field with many options and paths to grow in a career. Below is a summary of several types of nursing jobs, including educational requirements, salaries and general duties.
A nursing assistant, or a nurse’s aide, provides basic care to patients and helps them carry out basic tasks they cannot do on their own. They work under the supervision of a licensed nurse in home care, correctional institutions, hospitals, nursing homes and other health care centers.
A Licensed Practical Nurse or Licensed Vocational Nurse (LPN/LVN) is trained to assist registered nurses and physicians and provide a wide range of patient services. These can include: monitoring and recording vital signs, updating patient charts, providing bedside care, dressing wounds, administering medications, cleaning and managing medical equipment and instruments, and starting intravenous fluids, among other duties. Many LPNs decide to continue their schooling and become RNs in order to take advantage of a greater array of career choices.
Registered Nurses provide and coordinate patient care, educate patients and the public about various health conditions, and provide advice and emotional support to patients and their families. Most RNs work on a team with physicians and other health care specialists in various settings. Registered Nurses have many career opportunities to work in different specialties depending on their interests.
Nurse practitioners serve as primary and specialty care providers, delivering more advanced medical services to patients and their families. A practitioner requires a master’s degree or even a Doctor of Nursing Practice. The typical duties of a nurse practitioner include diagnosing and treating illnesses, physical exams, diagnostic testing and prescribing medications.
A nurse midwife specializes in the care of pregnant women. They also assist in labor and delivery, as well as in prenatal appointments. Nurse midwives continue their care after the delivery room by educating and counseling new mothers on how to care for their babies.
A Certified Registered Nurse Anesthetist (CRNA) specializes in assisting with anesthesia during surgeries and must complete a degree from a graduate level program. CRNAs make up some of the highest-paid nurse specialties in the medical field due to the high demand in surgical settings and detailed training they receive.
Nurse educators are responsible for teaching students in a nursing school or a college nursing program. They may teach comprehensive lessons about general nursing subjects or focus on an area of special expertise.
Nursing salaries can vary considerably by state, so it can be helpful to get a more detailed look at the breakdown across the country. The Bureau of Labor and Statistics (BLS) regularly tracks salaries by job type and location.
There are additional areas of specialization that nurses can pursue such as ER, surgery, cardiology and many others. The nursing field offers a wide range of opportunities for growth and development, and is expected to continue growing for the foreseeable future.
Paycor has many tools, including Learning Management and Talent Development, that can help you prepare and guide your nursing staff to chart a course for career growth and success.
 Previous:
Next:
Stay up to date with the latest HR trends

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Employee satisfaction surveys are a great way to stay in tune with what your employees are thinking. Get real insights on how to engage and motivate your team.

        Article      
Read Time: 10 min
Employee burnout can impact work quality and morale. Discover the warning signs for burnout and how to prevent it in your workplace.

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Being an effective leader requires more than just technical knowledge. Create an environment where everyone can thrive and understand emotions in oneself and others.
HCM Software
HR + Payroll Software
Talent Management
Workforce Management
Employee Experience
Benefits Administration
Quick Links
Services + Support
855-565-3285
Talk to Sales
855-752-8564
© 2023 Paycor, Inc  |  Refer Paycor  |  Privacy Policy  |  1-800-501-9462 |
*Represents approximately 30,000 corporate clients covering 40,000 businesses employing people