Making a Schedule for Employees

Creating a work schedule for employees is a balancing act of needs for the business and workers. Here you'll discover how to ensure your business has coverage.

Employee Experience
Last Updated:  January 8, 2020 | Read Time: 7 min
Creating a work schedule that takes your employees’ needs as well as business objectives into consideration can be a real balancing act. A flawless work schedule that makes everybody happy is something many managers strive for, but some have more difficulty than others achieving that perfection. If that second person is you – no matter if you use a spreadsheet, the tried and trusted manual schedule, or automated software – your road to a great schedule requires you to keep a few important points in mind.
First of all, the schedule you create should ensure that every shift is appropriately staffed for every role. As an example: Your restaurant probably doesn’t need two bartenders during lunchtime shifts, but you likely need at least two bartenders on busier weekend nights. Always make sure that you get these numbers right.
To make sure you’ve got the right amount of coverage, you need to keep an eye on business trends as well as events—both local and national—that could result an abnormal uptick in customers. Football games, theater performances and concerts are all events you need to keep track of. If the above referenced restaurant takes reservations, it’s important to keep a close eye on that list. There’s nothing quite like being unprepared when you don’t realize you’ve got a couple of party reservations booked for a normally slow weeknight… and you only have two servers on the schedule.
The second element of a good schedule is that it has to be error-free. Yeah, that seems like a “duh!” statement, but it’s a lot easier to make mistakes than to create the perfect employee schedule. These are a few of the most-made scheduling errors:
If you can avoid these common scheduling errors, you’re headed in the right direction. But what else should you be doing to make sure you’re building the perfect schedule? Easy! The perfect schedule keeps you and your employees happy and also maximizes profits and productivity.
If your scheduling process has gotten out of hand and you don’t know where to turn, let us help you prevent mishaps. Our employee scheduling software has robust functionality including the ability to assign shifts, establish rules, and plan budgets.
 Previous:
Next:
Stay up to date with the latest HR trends

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Employee satisfaction surveys are a great way to stay in tune with what your employees are thinking. Get real insights on how to engage and motivate your team.

        Article      
Read Time: 10 min
Employee burnout can impact work quality and morale. Discover the warning signs for burnout and how to prevent it in your workplace.

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Being an effective leader requires more than just technical knowledge. Create an environment where everyone can thrive and understand emotions in oneself and others.
HCM Software
HR + Payroll Software
Talent Management
Workforce Management
Employee Experience
Benefits Administration
Quick Links
Services + Support
855-565-3285
Talk to Sales
855-752-8564
© 2023 Paycor, Inc  |  Refer Paycor  |  Privacy Policy  |  1-800-501-9462 |
*Represents approximately 30,000 corporate clients covering 40,000 businesses employing people