COVID-19 Vaccine Refusal & Qualified Exemptions

Employees are searching for ways to legally refuse the COVID-19 vaccine and still keep their jobs. Find out who's qualified for the exemptions from the vaccine.

Workforce Management
Last Updated: January 13, 2022 | Read Time: 7 min
January 13, 2022 Update: The Supreme Court ruled to block the proposed vaccine-or-test mandate for large employers (businesses with 100 employees or more). In a separate ruling, the court voted in favor of a vaccine mandate for workers employed at healthcare facilities that receive federal funding through Medicare and Medicaid. It’s estimated that this ruling could affect more than 17 million workers.
For healthcare organizations and employers that choose to establish vaccination and testing requirements, Paycor is here to support you with an immunization tracker, expert HR advice and a comprehensive suite of products to help keep your business compliant. Contact our team or learn more here.
Related Article: COVID-19 Vaccine Mandates: What HR Leaders Need to Know
Vaccine hesitancy is very common in the United States as many people have reasons not to get the vaccine. However, as it stands today, personal and political beliefs do not qualify employees for an exemption from the vaccine. Some individuals may qualify for medical and religious exemption.
And, because there is ambiguity about who can get an exception and who cannot, HR leaders are now in a challenging position to create workplace policies and procedures to manage the pile of requests for vaccine exemptions on their own. As you work to manage the requests for exemptions, be sure to consider the following information.
Even though few employees may actually qualify for medical exemptions from the vaccine, these individuals are protected by the ADA or American Disabilities Act in workplaces with more than 15 employees.
Many medical experts have emphasized that vaccines are safe, even for patients with chronic conditions, but that doesn’t mean your employee may not require a special accommodation.
Currently, the most common medical exemptions are for those who are allergic to COVID-19 vaccine ingredients or have had a severe allergic reaction to the first shot (anaphylactic shock).
While the EEOC allows employers to require COVID-19 vaccines, “If a particular employee cannot meet such a safety-related qualification standard because of a disability, the employer may not require compliance for that employee unless it can demonstrate that the individual would pose a “direct threat” to the health or safety of the employee or others in the workplace.
Additionally, an employee with a disability who does not get vaccinated for COVID-19 must let the employer know that he or she needs an exemption from the requirement or a change at work. This is known as a reasonable accommodation.” (EEOC.gov)
To plan for the possibility of COVID-19 vaccination exemptions related to disability, employers should consider creating a policy and a procedure for review of whether the vaccination exemption would pose a direct threat to the workplace.
Although many major religious denominations and institutions have voiced public support of vaccines against COVID-19, requests for religious exceptions have recently surged. Before you accept that letter from your employee’s online pastor, it’s important to know the facts.
What does this mean? This means that religious exemptions must be reviewed on a case-by-case basis. Employers and private businesses reserve the right to create policies and procedures that factor in the regulations above while also protecting the health and safety of other employees and customers. Consequently, employers reserve the right to ask further questions about an employee’s beliefs that are “sincerely held” in order to evaluate the origin of beliefs. This process should be well documented and handled by one person or a team of people in order to maintain consistency.
Details will continue to emerge about the vaccine mandate for employers. We’d suggest creating a mandatory vaccination policy and a procedure to manage vaccination exemption requests for medical or religious reasons that comply with ADA and Title VII rules. Ensure your managers and supervisors are trained and that the rules have been clearly communicated to employees.
As you continue to navigate the impact of COVID-19 on your workplace, Paycor is here to help with products and resources.
 Previous:
Next:
Stay up to date with the latest HR trends

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Employee satisfaction surveys are a great way to stay in tune with what your employees are thinking. Get real insights on how to engage and motivate your team.

        Article      
Read Time: 10 min
Employee burnout can impact work quality and morale. Discover the warning signs for burnout and how to prevent it in your workplace.

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Being an effective leader requires more than just technical knowledge. Create an environment where everyone can thrive and understand emotions in oneself and others.
HCM Software
HR + Payroll Software
Talent Management
Workforce Management
Employee Experience
Benefits Administration
Quick Links
Services + Support
855-565-3285
Talk to Sales
855-752-8564
© 2023 Paycor, Inc  |  Refer Paycor  |  Privacy Policy  |  1-800-501-9462 |
*Represents approximately 30,000 corporate clients covering 40,000 businesses employing people