6 Tips to Improve Your Hiring Process

Filling an open position is hard and bad choices can be costly. But recruiters need to move quickly. Get tips to hire the right people for the jobs.

Talent Management
Last Updated:  January 27, 2020 | Read Time: 5 min
It’s time-consuming, demanding and pressure-packed – especially since choosing the wrong person can set an organization back hundreds of thousands of dollars (the Department of Labor estimates replacing a bad hire can cost on average, 1/3 their annual salary) and negatively impact employee morale. But with a price tag that high, many employers are rushed into bad decisions by hiring too quickly. In fact, the Harvard Business Review indicates that as much as 80% of employee turnover is a direct result of poor hiring decisions.
On the flip side, open positions create gaps in productivity, which can put undue stress on remaining employees, lead to errors and create an overall sense of frustration and burnout. To help your organization navigate the demands of hiring, here are 6 tips to implement when looking to fill open positions.
 
And remember that your careers page is a direct reflection of your company. Include information about open positions, as well as benefits, culture, potential career paths, company news and awards. Offer insight into what it’s really like to work at your organization. Be consistent with your brand to set expectations for candidates and get them excited before they even walk through the door.
 
Create a binary yes/no decision process for your interview team. That way, no candidate is stuck in the “maybe” category and potentially forgotten or overlooked.
 
To uncover bottlenecks in your hiring process you should track these 7 recruiting metrics:
For a breakdown of each metric and how they can impact your bottom line, check out this interactive article.
Paycor Recruiting is the simple, smart, safe recruiting platform built by recruiters for recruiters and HR hiring teams. Build candidate pipelines, create branded career pages, customize job applications and find great candidates, all while remaining compliant. At Paycor we offer more than best-in-class technology, we pride ourselves on our expertise. Take a self-guided product tour and see the technology for yourself.
Sources: Department of Labor, Harvard Business Review, Hireology Blog Hiring Statistics
 Previous:
Next:
Stay up to date with the latest HR trends

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Employee satisfaction surveys are a great way to stay in tune with what your employees are thinking. Get real insights on how to engage and motivate your team.

        Article      
Read Time: 10 min
Employee burnout can impact work quality and morale. Discover the warning signs for burnout and how to prevent it in your workplace.

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Being an effective leader requires more than just technical knowledge. Create an environment where everyone can thrive and understand emotions in oneself and others.
HCM Software
HR + Payroll Software
Talent Management
Workforce Management
Employee Experience
Benefits Administration
Quick Links
Services + Support
855-565-3285
Talk to Sales
855-752-8564
© 2023 Paycor, Inc  |  Refer Paycor  |  Privacy Policy  |  1-800-501-9462 |
*Represents approximately 30,000 corporate clients covering 40,000 businesses employing people