Letting Someone Go? 7 Best Practices for Termination

Need to let an employee go? Terminating employees is never easy, but here are 7 ways to make the process smoother and avert legal action.

Employee Experience
Last Updated:  April 16, 2014 | Read Time: 4 min
Most managers would agree: the least favorite part of their jobs is
terminating employees. This anxiety, combined with an inherently
uncomfortable situation, can lead to mistakes and potential legal
troubles. For example, the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission
(EEOC) awarded $42 million in monetary penalties in 2012 to employees
who were subjects of discrimination. In addition, more than half of
wrongful termination lawsuits are won by the former employee.
Reduce your risk of lawsuits and lessen the traumatic impact of a
termination by following these seven best practices:
Make sure your decision to terminate an employee is based on provable
facts and is only for business reasons. Otherwise, you may run into
trouble if the termination reason is questioned later on.
Documentation is your best defense in the event of a lawsuit. Even
employment attorneys are often surprised at the lack of documentation
companies maintain about the employee’s performance and their reasons
for termination. Don’t let the conversation devolve into “he said, she
said” by backing up your assertions with hard proof.
Resist the urge to take the easy way out and terminate an employee via
email or phone. Have the meeting in person. Include only yourself, the
employee and possibly one other manager or HR representative. Having
another person in a managerial role in the room gives you another
witness in case your actions are called into question, allows that
person to take notes if needed and discourages any abusive reaction on
the part of the employee.
Tell the truth about why you decided to fire the employee. Provide
honest feedback on his performance or the reasons for letting him go.
If applicable, let him know that you attempted to find another position
at the company for which he would be a good fit.
The employee will probably remember this meeting for the rest of his
life, so make sure you’re prepared. Plan your termination meeting in
advance, drawing on how-to guides, templates and checklists from HR
experts.
With the right plan and execution, you can do a lot to make the
experience less uncomfortable for everyone.
Be consistent with your company’s policies, contracts and past
practices. If a lawsuit is filed, you’ll be much better off if you
followed a consistent process. Review pertinent policies and contracts
before you make a termination, so you can ensure you’re following your
own rules.
Whatever your reason for letting the employee go, he deserves to be
treated with dignity. Here are a few ways to show respect for the
departing employee:
* Don’t fire him on a Friday afternoon—he will spend the weekend
feeling helpless and cut off from all resources.
* Resist the temptation to lighten the mood by making jokes during the
termination meeting—for the employee, this is no laughing matter.
* If applicable, explain any re-employment assistance your company
offers.
* Express confidence in his future success.
* After the meeting, give him time to compose himself.
Terminations are a fact of life for managers, but by following these
best practices you can shield your organization from legal
repercussions and mitigate an unpleasant situation for departing
employees.
*You can find complete how-to guide, termination checklists and sample
exit interview forms in the HR Support Center,
a comprehensive knowledgebase of HR guides, templates and more.
Sources: EEOC Enforcement and Litigation Data, Lawyers and Settlements,
TLNT.com, HR Support Center
This content is intended for educational purposes only and should not
be considered legal advice.
 Previous:
Next:
Stay up to date with the latest HR trends

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Employee satisfaction surveys are a great way to stay in tune with what your employees are thinking. Get real insights on how to engage and motivate your team.

        Article      
Read Time: 10 min
Employee burnout can impact work quality and morale. Discover the warning signs for burnout and how to prevent it in your workplace.

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Being an effective leader requires more than just technical knowledge. Create an environment where everyone can thrive and understand emotions in oneself and others.
HCM Software
HR + Payroll Software
Talent Management
Workforce Management
Employee Experience
Benefits Administration
Quick Links
Services + Support
855-565-3285
Talk to Sales
855-752-8564
© 2023 Paycor, Inc  |  Refer Paycor  |  Privacy Policy  |  1-800-501-9462 |
*Represents approximately 30,000 corporate clients covering 40,000 businesses employing people