Hiring Tools To Streamline The Recruiting Process

From email templates to the easy creation of job offer letters, Paycor's hiring tools have you covered. See how to improve your recruiting.

Talent Management
Last Updated:  October 4, 2019 | Read Time: 8 min
Paycor Recruiting is the only applicant tracking system (ATS) that comes with over 90 expertly written recruiting emails so your team can hit the ground running. (You can also create your own.)
How Email Templates Help Your Team Automate The Hiring Process
 
Paycor’s email templates and hiring automation features simplify the recruiting process, increase efficiency, improve communications and reduce errors.
 
Recruiters
HR Directors
Executives
Your personal assistant
Add, edit, and remove templates in Paycor Recruiting and then use the drag and drop email helper to send emails directly from the system. Emails appear to come from your primary email client and all the tools are set up without support from IT.
Personalized AI driven emails
Paycor Recruiting knows what stage every candidate is in at any moment. When you are passing on candidates, Paycor Recruiting helps choose what template to send, what signature to use, and allows you to auto-delay communications. Choose from dozens of tokens and Paycor Recruiting will pre-populate fields like names, jobs, locations, etc. The Candidate will receive what looks like a handwritten email that corresponds to the appropriate stage of the recruiting process.
Elevate your brand
Whether you’re sending a reminder email to a hiring manager or an interview confirmation to a candidate, emails sent from Paycor Recruiting are always polished and look as though they’ve been sent directly from your inbox. You can always preview exactly what the recipient will see so you’ll have the confidence to communicate within the system every time and significantly reduce errors that reflect poorly on your company.
Applicant tracking systems fail when recruiting teams can’t get managers engaged. That’s why Paycor Recruiting can be used from any device, anywhere, and you can give feedback without a login.
 
Paycor Recruiting tools improve adoption on day one. No more bottlenecks.
Recruiters
HR Directors
Executives
Because Paycor Recruiting was built with hiring managers in mind, your entire team benefits. Recruiters can utilize smart alerts to promote collaboration with hiring managers and drive faster turnaround times. For HR Directors and Executives, getting teams trained on the system is a breeze and Paycor Recruiting boasts the highest hiring manager adoption rates in the industry.
No login required
At Paycor Recruiting we’re always looking to make hiring easier. Paycor Recruiting Echo is the simple answer to busy hiring managers and executives that don’t have time to log in to their applicant tracking systems. With Echo, your team gets the hiring manager tools they need to keep the recruitment management system up-to-date just by responding to email. Simple tasks should only take seconds. With Echo, people can change the status of candidates, capture interview feedback, and approve jobs and offers using email.
No login required.
Improved adoption rates
Paycor Recruiting is a true hiring management system, flexible, and designed to be like hiring – dynamic. Green is go. Red is no. Smart alerts trigger action and encourage decision making. Best of all, we keep the process simple. No hassles, no confusion and nothing new to learn.
Easily Create Job Offer LettersBoost your offer acceptance rates by making it easier for candidates to say yes. Gather approvals, create, send, and receive signed employment offer letters without ever leaving Paycor Recruiting.
 
How Paycor Recruiting’s Job Offer Feature help your team close more candidates.
Candidates
Recruiters
HR Directors
Make it easy for candidates to say yes with digital offer letters that can be signed from any device. Use pre-built offer letter templates to save time and track the entire process from within our system. Hiring Managers and HR Directors can decrease time to hire and control the offer process from one centralized system.
Extend the candidate experience through the offer acceptance stage by organizing approvals, using our smart offer templates, and tracking signatures through our offer approval software.
 
Gather hiring approvals
 
Just like gathering feedback in the initial stages of interviewing, the job offer management process can be a little like herding cats. Paycor Recruiting streamlines this by allowing you to message everyone, track their responses, and move the process forward faster.
Create job offer letters
Paycor Recruiting offers pre-built templates or the ability to customize your own. Either way, offers will auto-fill with information gathered from your approval process to ensure consistency and control. No more updating Word documents every time you send out an offer.
Track and manage acceptance
Paycor Recruiting is integrated with DocuSign, the leading digital transaction management provider, which means candidates can accept your offer from any device they choose. All letters are securely stored on the candidate’s offer detail page so only authorized users can read them anytime. Your team can even set custom alerts to insure that they follow up with candidates who might be on the fence and celebrate the moment you receive a signature.
Job Offer and Approval Processes
Our job and offer approval processes are fully customizable, can be email-driven, and provide the visibility, control, and exception management that employers need to grow quickly.
Quickly create, manage and approve jobs and offers.
Recruiters
HR Director
Executives
Approving job offers is a breeze with Paycor Recruiting. We’ve built recruiting workflows into our job offer approval tools that allow you to make getting an employment offer approval simple, often without even logging in!
 
Approvals with no login required
Paycor Recruiting Echo is our answer to the ever-present problem of busy hiring managers and executives that don’t have time to log in to their applicant tracking systems. With Echo, your managers and executives can approve or deny job and offer approvals by simply responding to an email sent to their everyday inbox – no login required.
Dashboards promote accountability
Smart dashboards allow you to track your jobs and offers through each stage of the process. Smart alerts remind users in-app as well as via email when an event or task needs their attention. This unique visibility into your key processes translates to increased accountability, process efficiency, and improvement.
Fully custom or templated
Whether you need custom sequential or all-at-once processes, Paycor Recruiting helps you create approval flows that are easy and effective. Recruiters, Hiring Managers, and Executives can have as much control and visibility they need, to effectively manage the business end of recruiting.
Take a guided tour of our products to learn how the hiring tools can help your team streamline the recruiting process at your organization.
 Previous:
Next:
Stay up to date with the latest HR trends

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Employee satisfaction surveys are a great way to stay in tune with what your employees are thinking. Get real insights on how to engage and motivate your team.

        Article      
Read Time: 10 min
Employee burnout can impact work quality and morale. Discover the warning signs for burnout and how to prevent it in your workplace.

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Being an effective leader requires more than just technical knowledge. Create an environment where everyone can thrive and understand emotions in oneself and others.
HCM Software
HR + Payroll Software
Talent Management
Workforce Management
Employee Experience
Benefits Administration
Quick Links
Services + Support
855-565-3285
Talk to Sales
855-752-8564
© 2023 Paycor, Inc  |  Refer Paycor  |  Privacy Policy  |  1-800-501-9462 |
*Represents approximately 30,000 corporate clients covering 40,000 businesses employing people