Wage & Hour Laws by State

In this article, we cover minimum wage for hourly and tipped employees, minimum work age and other unique state laws.

Workforce Management
Last Updated: December 22, 2021 | Read Time: 23 min
The Department of Labor (DOL) is the federal agency that enforces the wage and hour laws in the United States. But states and often cities also have specific laws for their citizens. This is a not-so-concise list of all laws that business leaders need to be aware of, based on the most recent research*.
What Are Federal Labor Laws?
The Fair Labor Standards Act (FLSA) oversees the federal minimum wagefor covered nonexempt (non-salaried) employees. Minimum wage is $7.25 per hour. Tipped employees must be paid a minimum wage of at least $2.13 an hour if the following three factors are met:
States that have higher minimum wages are indicated in the chart below.
FLSA also mandates overtime pay laws. Non-exempt employees receive overtime pay of time-and-a-half per workweek for any hours worked over 40.
Keep in mind, employers are required by law to display an official poster within easy view (such as in a breakroom or cafeteria) outlining FLSA guidelines.
What Employee Records Should I Keep?
Per the FLSA, employers are required to keep the following employee information and retain records for at least three years:
Related Post: Check out our article about Minimum Wage by State
State Wage & Hour Laws
Paycor Can Help
Our expertise goes far beyond compliance. From recruiting and onboarding to people management, labor costs and more, we provide technology and expertise to help business leaders solve problems and grow. How can we help your organization? Take a guided tour of our most popular solutions to find out.
1$14.00 rate is for California employers with 26 or more employees. Employers in California with 25 or fewer employees have a minimum wage of $13.00 per hour. For local minimum wage rules, see our guide to California Minimum Wage by City.
2$11.75 applies to Maryland employers with 15 or more employees. Employers in Maryland with 14 or fewer employees must pay a minimum wage of $11.60 per hour.
3$10.08 rate is for large employers in Minnesota (with annual gross revenues of at least $500,000). Small employers have a minimum wage of $8.21 per hour.
4$8.75 is for Nevada employees who are offered health insurance. Nevada employees who are not offered health insurance must receive $9.75 per hour.
5$12.00 applies to New Jersey employers who are non-seasonal and with 6 or more employees. Seasonal employees and those working for business who employ 5 or fewer employees must receive $11.00 per hour.
6New York and Oregon state minimum wage applies in areas that are not governed by a higher, local minimum wage ordinance. New York City and Portland Metro are examples of areas—like California—which have local minimum wage rates that exceed the statewide minimum.
* Paycor is not a legal, tax, benefit, accounting or investment advisor. This document is intended for informational purposes only and does not constitute legal information or advice. All communication from Paycor should be confirmed by your company’s legal, tax, benefit, accounting or investment advisor before making any decisions.
 Previous:
Next:
Stay up to date with the latest HR trends

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Employee satisfaction surveys are a great way to stay in tune with what your employees are thinking. Get real insights on how to engage and motivate your team.

        Article      
Read Time: 10 min
Employee burnout can impact work quality and morale. Discover the warning signs for burnout and how to prevent it in your workplace.

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Being an effective leader requires more than just technical knowledge. Create an environment where everyone can thrive and understand emotions in oneself and others.
HCM Software
HR + Payroll Software
Talent Management
Workforce Management
Employee Experience
Benefits Administration
Quick Links
Services + Support
855-565-3285
Talk to Sales
855-752-8564
© 2023 Paycor, Inc  |  Refer Paycor  |  Privacy Policy  |  1-800-501-9462 |
*Represents approximately 30,000 corporate clients covering 40,000 businesses employing people