5 Benefits of Online Payroll Systems

Take a look at 5 benefits your company or small business could reap by moving to an online payroll system.

Workforce Management
Last Updated:  March 8, 2019 | Read Time: 4 min
There’s no denying we live in a digital world. We pay for fast food with our phone and use Venmo to repay a friend for concert tickets. Digital transactions are everywhere—including the workplace as more companies move to online payroll software systems.
Many businesses conduct their payroll process in-house in the form of full-fledged payroll departments or small business owners attempting to do it on their own. But there are a number of advantages to switching to an online payroll service, including minimizing mistakes. Take a look at some of the benefits your company or small business could reap by moving to online payroll.  
Do the math. How many hours does your accounting department or HR professionals spend preparing to run payroll and manage tax filings? Now translate that into dollars. It’s easy to see how those expenses can multiply. Whoever is managing your payroll is probably wasting too much time on it. By making the switch, you and your team can avoid spending hours (and money) on administrative tasks that are automated with an online payroll system.  
Online payroll systems should offer a single source of truth, where employee data is entered one time and one time only. This significantly decreases the odds of data entry error—especially if the information has to be entered every pay period. With fewer opportunities to manually enter inaccurate information, online payroll minimizes the risks of mistakes.
RELATED ARTICLE: The True Cost of Payroll Services 
After your online payroll system is set up, you’ll find that you’re able to complete payroll within minutes, not hours. The online format allows you to easily calculate pay based on hour, overtime and bonuses while effortlessly keeping track of PTO. This frees up your team to focus on more important things, like growing the business. 
Online payroll platforms help ensure you meet all deadlines for direct deposit, payroll tax payments and other necessities. Unfortunately, this level of reliability is often lacking in in-house payroll systems. A missed deadline can be incredibly costly, potentially resulting in penalties and fines from the IRS.
Whether it’s an employee looking for information on a previous paycheck or an executive trying to access a specific report, an online system makes it simple to find important records. Your payroll reports and information can be stored online and securely accessed by supervisors or managers who need to review them.The online approach to HR and payroll processing offers time savings, deadline alerts, easy access to data and affordability. All of these factors combined are beneficial to any company. Contact us for more information on how an online payroll solution can help your company or small business.

 Previous:
Next:
Stay up to date with the latest HR trends

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Employee satisfaction surveys are a great way to stay in tune with what your employees are thinking. Get real insights on how to engage and motivate your team.

        Article      
Read Time: 10 min
Employee burnout can impact work quality and morale. Discover the warning signs for burnout and how to prevent it in your workplace.

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Being an effective leader requires more than just technical knowledge. Create an environment where everyone can thrive and understand emotions in oneself and others.
HCM Software
HR + Payroll Software
Talent Management
Workforce Management
Employee Experience
Benefits Administration
Quick Links
Services + Support
855-565-3285
Talk to Sales
855-752-8564
© 2023 Paycor, Inc  |  Refer Paycor  |  Privacy Policy  |  1-800-501-9462 |
*Represents approximately 30,000 corporate clients covering 40,000 businesses employing people