What Payroll Vendors Are NOT Telling You About Same Day ACH

With Same Day ACH, employers now have more flexibility and accuracy in issuing direct deposit payments.

Workforce Management
Last Updated:  October 24, 2016 | Read Time: 3 min
Paycor offers Same Day ACH to clients—just like many other vendors. But
here’s what others are not telling you.
What is Same Day ACH?
With Same Day ACH, employers now have more flexibility and accuracy in
issuing direct deposit payments. Employees can now receive deposits on
the same day that payroll is initiated, while last-minute adjustments
are no longer an issue when ensuring the right payday amount is
deposited.
The Fine Print
Some payroll vendors are touting Same Day ACH as a product enhancement
that they are uniquely offering. Others are emphasizing the positive
aspects but failing to call out the limitations and restrictions.
*#1 Same Day ACH is not like wiring cash to an employee
Keep in mind your employees will not receive money in real time.
Promising otherwise can lead to serious complications. Same Day ACH
deposits would be available to ensure proper bank funds, for example,
but employees wouldn’t have those funds to make a purchase or buy lunch.
An employee’s bank won’t be required to fund the account before the end
of their processing day, but Same Day ACH acts as a placeholder in the
account to guard against overdrafts and the like.
*#2 Restrictions do apply
No international items or deposits are eligible for Same Day ACH.
Deposits over $25,000 are also ineligible.
*#3 Complications exist
Payroll funds need to be wired by clients to vendors before banks will
send the direct deposits.
*#4 Additional fees apply
Processing Same Day ACH deposits cost more to process for banks, which
lead to fees normally not charged.
Questions? We’re here to help. Feel free to call your customer service
rep or our main line at 800.381.0053

Enter your email below to receive a weekly recap of the latest articles
from Paycor’s Resource Center.


MktoForms2.loadForm("//app-ab01.marketo.com", "003-JWW-697", 1796);
Check your inbox
for an email confirming your subscription. Enjoy!
 Previous:
Next:
Stay up to date with the latest HR trends

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Employee satisfaction surveys are a great way to stay in tune with what your employees are thinking. Get real insights on how to engage and motivate your team.

        Article      
Read Time: 10 min
Employee burnout can impact work quality and morale. Discover the warning signs for burnout and how to prevent it in your workplace.

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Being an effective leader requires more than just technical knowledge. Create an environment where everyone can thrive and understand emotions in oneself and others.
HCM Software
HR + Payroll Software
Talent Management
Workforce Management
Employee Experience
Benefits Administration
Quick Links
Services + Support
855-565-3285
Talk to Sales
855-752-8564
© 2023 Paycor, Inc  |  Refer Paycor  |  Privacy Policy  |  1-800-501-9462 |
*Represents approximately 30,000 corporate clients covering 40,000 businesses employing people