Paying Employees with Paycards? The Pros and Cons

Using paycards to pay employees has pros and cons. Read how paycards affect both employees and employers.

Employee Experience
Last Updated:  November 27, 2018 | Read Time: 4 min
With the rise and ease of direct deposit, paper paychecks have pretty much gone the way of the dinosaurs. But, did you know there’s another paperless option you can use to pay your employees? Paycards offer a distinct advantage to employees who are underbanked – those who have a bank account but rely largely on unconventional finance options such as check cashing services – or unbanked – those who don’t have a banking relationship at all. Their wages are simply loaded to a reusable, refillable card that can then be used at points of purchase or ATMs.
Estimates from a 2017 Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC) survey showed that 6.5% of households in the United States were unbanked, representing approximately 8.4 million households. Additionally, 18.7%, or 24.2 million, were underbanked. More than 30% of these households have an annual family income of $25,000 or less. And, while unbanked and underbanked employees can be found in all industry segments, the greatest concentration can be found in construction, staffing, hotels, and franchise businesses such as restaurants.
Providing payments directly through a debit card saves you money by not wasting it on the paper used to print checks. Payroll debit cards for employees also eliminates the manual preparation, printing and distributing required from your payroll department, letting them focus on other tasks and saving your company money. Additionally, using a paycard can save your unbanked employees time and eliminate the exorbitant fees charged by expensive check-cashing stores and predatory payday lenders. And, they get the same legal protections from fraud that debit card holders have.

As with any form of pay, paycards do have some considerations to look out for. Depending on the provider you use, the cards can hit employees with fees for items such as monthly maintenance, point-of-sale charges, ATM use, and some even charge for calling to check the card balance. It wouldn’t take many $1.50 ATM fees to wipe out an hour’s worth of work for employees who make minimum wage.
Another consideration: although employee paycards can be a money-saver for your company, you legally can’t require employees to switch to that payment method. You have to provide the option of a paper paycheck or direct deposit.
If your company decides to use paycards, it’s best to follow a few simple rules to help ensure you stay in compliance with state and federal laws:
Enter your email below to receive a weekly recap of the latest articles
from Paycor’s Resource Center.


MktoForms2.loadForm("//app-ab01.marketo.com", "003-JWW-697", 1796);
Check your inbox
for an email confirming your subscription. Enjoy!
 Previous:
Next:
Stay up to date with the latest HR trends

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Employee satisfaction surveys are a great way to stay in tune with what your employees are thinking. Get real insights on how to engage and motivate your team.

        Article      
Read Time: 10 min
Employee burnout can impact work quality and morale. Discover the warning signs for burnout and how to prevent it in your workplace.

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Being an effective leader requires more than just technical knowledge. Create an environment where everyone can thrive and understand emotions in oneself and others.
HCM Software
HR + Payroll Software
Talent Management
Workforce Management
Employee Experience
Benefits Administration
Quick Links
Services + Support
855-565-3285
Talk to Sales
855-752-8564
© 2023 Paycor, Inc  |  Refer Paycor  |  Privacy Policy  |  1-800-501-9462 |
*Represents approximately 30,000 corporate clients covering 40,000 businesses employing people