What the American Rescue Plan Act Means for HR Leaders 

President Biden signed the American Rescue Plan Act into law on March 11, 2021. See how it impacts HR leaders.

Workforce Management
Last Updated: November 8, 2021 | Read Time: 7 min
UPDATE NOVEMBER 8: The Biden administration’s infrastructure legislation ends the employee retention credit (ERC) early. As of now, the latest language in the bill has ERC wages paid after September 30, 2021 ineligible for the credit (except for wages paid by an eligible recovery startup business). Employers must report ERC credits taken before September 30, 2021 and can file an amended 941 return up to three years after the reporting date.
If you work in HR, you’ll know that a new administration often means the passing of landmark legislation which will affect your business. These aren’t ordinary times, though, and the American Rescue Plan Act (ARPA) signed into law by President Biden on March 11, 2021, is just the latest in a series of big-ticket COVID-19 relief packages. The bill updates several programs initiated by previous legislation, and adds major stimulus measures of its own. To help business leaders, we’re breaking down what ARPA means for you.
The American Rescue Plan Act extends the Paycheck Protection Program as well as payroll tax credits (established by the CARES Act) and emergency paid leave provisions (established by the Families First Coronavirus Response Act). It also increases the exclusion for employer provider dependent care assistance. The good news is, Paycor’s system is set up to handle all these changes. 
Here are some of the measures in more detail:
The following measures may not directly impact your business, but they’ll affect your employees: 
Some additional provisions made big news before the bill passed, but were not included in the final act: most notably, an increase to the federal minimum wage to $15 per hour and a proposal to make federal paid leave permanent. Both items remain on the agenda for the current Congress. Paycor will keep HR leaders updated on all the latest important legislation—and how it impacts businesses.
Paycor builds HR solutions for leaders. With Paycor, you can modernize every aspect of people management, from the way you recruit, onboard and develop your team, to the way you pay and retain them. See how Paycor can help the leaders of your organization solve the problems of today and tomorrow.
 Previous:
Next:
Stay up to date with the latest HR trends

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Employee satisfaction surveys are a great way to stay in tune with what your employees are thinking. Get real insights on how to engage and motivate your team.

        Article      
Read Time: 10 min
Employee burnout can impact work quality and morale. Discover the warning signs for burnout and how to prevent it in your workplace.

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Being an effective leader requires more than just technical knowledge. Create an environment where everyone can thrive and understand emotions in oneself and others.
HCM Software
HR + Payroll Software
Talent Management
Workforce Management
Employee Experience
Benefits Administration
Quick Links
Services + Support
855-565-3285
Talk to Sales
855-752-8564
© 2023 Paycor, Inc  |  Refer Paycor  |  Privacy Policy  |  1-800-501-9462 |
*Represents approximately 30,000 corporate clients covering 40,000 businesses employing people