FAQ: How to Hire People with Disabilities

If you’re interested in hiring people with disabilities, look no further. We’ve answered FAQs to help you remain complaint.

Talent Management
Last Updated:  January 17, 2020 | Read Time: 7 min
Only 19.1% of disabled Americans are employed compared with 65.9% of the general population, according to the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics. Qualified job seekers with disabilities may be held back by companies’ fear of expensive accommodations or compliance regulations.
If you’re interested in hiring people with disabilities, look no further. We’ve answered FAQs to help you remain compliant.
A: The concept of “disability” is defined by context. For employers, a person with a disability is someone who:
While this does not apply to short-term impairments of 6 months or less, it can include impairments for which symptoms do not necessarily appear consistently, such as epilepsy or various mental health conditions.
A: The advantages of hiring disabled workers are the same as those for hiring anyone—adding great people to your team! A willingness to hire disabled people also means you have the potential to choose from a wider talent pool, add new perspectives to your organization and benefit from various tax credits.
A: There are several possible tax incentives available for companies who hire people with disabilities.
The Work Opportunity Tax Credit (WOTC) provides one-time tax incentives for hiring individuals from groups who face significant barriers to employment, including veterans, SSI recipients and those who have completed a Vocational Rehabilitation program. The maximum available credit can be as much as $9,600.
The Disabled Access Credit provides credits to small businesses (earning $1 million or less or having no more than 30 full time employees) so that they can provide access to workers with disabilities.
The Architectural and Transportation Barrier Removal Tax Deduction allows deductions of up to $15,000 per year for businesses of any size who remove barriers—architectural or transportation—which limit the mobility of the disabled or elderly.
A: An easy step is to ensure that your hiring process isn’t biased against those with disabilities. Job seekers whose applications include references to disabilities—even those that will have no impact on their capacity to fulfill the job for which they are applying—are 26% less likely to be invited for an interview, according to a Rutgers University study.
Furthermore, it’s important to make your hiring process accessible—this could apply to where you advertise vacancies, the ease-of-use of your website and any locations where you hold interviews. Here’s a great question to answer right now: Is your website accessible for the visually impaired? If not, fines and penalties may be right around the corner.
Additionally, all staff involved in recruiting and hiring should be educated on the importance of accessibility and what is required to stay compliant (see below).

A: The Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990 (ADA) is the most important piece of federal legislation prohibiting discrimination against people with disabilities. Title 1 of the ADA prohibits discrimination in all aspects of employment, including hiring, firing, compensation, promotions, training and benefits.
A: No, the ADA (and ADAAA) does not apply to private companies with less than 15 employees.
A: Enforcement of workplace anti-discrimination legislation is the responsibility of the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC). If a company is accused of discriminating against a disabled employee, they may face EEOC penalties. The EEOC also provides assistance for employers seeking to comply with anti-discrimination legislation.
A: Companies may not discriminate against job applicants or employees with disabilities. Job applicants cannot be refused because of a disability, while employees may not be segregated, harassed or fired on the basis of disability.
Furthermore, companies are required to provide reasonable accommodation to the needs of disabled applicants and employees. This can mean making offices accessible, providing specialist equipment or making exceptions to workplace rules. Even if requests for such assistance seem impractical or too expensive, companies must at least consider the request—and may be able to apply to benefit from special funding in order to help disabled applicants and employees (see below).
A: Companies are not required to fulfil requests that would fundamentally alter the nature of the job, lower production or performance standards or incur significant difficulty or expense. Whether providing assistance is too difficult/expensive is decided on a case-by-case basis, considering company size and resources. If assistance is deemed to be an undue burden, employers must attempt to find an alternative solution as well as giving the relevant employee the option of providing the missing funds themselves.
A: No, the ADA does not give preference to candidates with disabilities. The only obligation on companies is that they consider applicants on their merits, and don’t discriminate based on disability.
A: During an interview process—until a job offer is made—you cannot ask an applicant questions about whether they have a disability, even if such a disability is obvious.
You may ask about whether an applicant may need extra assistance with or changes made to the application process, work environment or how the job is done (if you have a reasonable belief that a reasonable accommodation may be required).
An employer is however permitted to ask applicants to voluntarily report whether they have a disability, but only for the purposes of an affirmative action program.
A: Once a conditional offer is submitted, it is permitted to ask disability-related questions and conduct medical examinations but only if these are asked of all new employees of the same category.
Once a candidate is employed, disability-related questions and medical examinations are allowed if job-related and necessary from a business perspective.
Finding the right team is never easy, especially in a tight labor market. But Paycor’s Recruiting Software helps make your applicant tracking process smoother, more efficient and compliant. Interested in learning more? Take a product tour today.
 Previous:
Next:
Stay up to date with the latest HR trends

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Employee satisfaction surveys are a great way to stay in tune with what your employees are thinking. Get real insights on how to engage and motivate your team.

        Article      
Read Time: 10 min
Employee burnout can impact work quality and morale. Discover the warning signs for burnout and how to prevent it in your workplace.

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Being an effective leader requires more than just technical knowledge. Create an environment where everyone can thrive and understand emotions in oneself and others.
HCM Software
HR + Payroll Software
Talent Management
Workforce Management
Employee Experience
Benefits Administration
Quick Links
Services + Support
855-565-3285
Talk to Sales
855-752-8564
© 2023 Paycor, Inc  |  Refer Paycor  |  Privacy Policy  |  1-800-501-9462 |
*Represents approximately 30,000 corporate clients covering 40,000 businesses employing people