5 Tips for Developing Company and Employee Objectives

Objectives and key results help managers and staff stay aligned. Learn how to put a program in place.

Employee Experience
Last Updated:  February 8, 2021 | Read Time: 5 min
If you’ve ever Googled “What’s an OKR?” you’re not alone. OKRs mean objectives and key results and they’re becoming a very popular way for business leaders to get everyone on the same page. By making your organization’s OKRs visible and transparent, employees get a better sense of how they can contribute. And the more they understand the overall impact they make, the more engaged they’ll be.
But setting organizational objectives isn’t easy. You have to take into consideration internal factors such as financial resources and human capital as well as external factors such as competitors, demand for the products, and the economy. You’ll also want to encourage employees to set their individual objectives by aligning their contributions to the departmental and organizational objectives. It’s easy to understand why many leaders struggle to set their organizational objectives because there are too many variables that can affect the end results.
It IS a lot to align. Here are some of best practices to consider as you develop OKRs for your company, department and employees.
Many businesses start OKR development with a SWOT analysis (strengths, weaknesses, opportunities, threats). This process helps companies identify what they are best. While some leaders may find this technique simplistic, it’s a great way to figure out what your company’s vision is and your ultimate goal. It provides you with a great framework to start defining your organizational objectives.
The vision that you have for your organization should be reflected in your company’s objectives. Organizational objectives can be a mix of both short- and long-term goals.
Start by determining your five-year goals. Where do you see your company in five years? What do you want to have achieved? Then think about the strategies that will get you there. These strategies are the framework for your one-year objectives. They will outline what you have to do right now and what your three-month or quarterly goals should be in order to support the business strategies that will get you to your five-year goals.
Measurable – How will you know when you have achieved your objective? What benchmarks are you going to use to measure your success?
Attainable – Is this objective achievable given your resources? What are the obstacles that you are going to encounter, and can you get past the hurdles?
Relevant – How relevant is this objective to the company and its employees? Will it benefit your organization?
Timebound – When do you want to achieve this objective? Give yourself a deadline.
Taking into consideration the SMART model, your objective can be defined as “Getting the Best High-Tech Company award by the Local Business Board by the end of [DATE]”.
Setting organizational objectives is a daunting task. Once you’ve created a framework around your company’s goals, the most important thing for you to do is to communicate them to your employees. Engage your employees by clearly showing them where your company is heading and how you want to achieve your objectives. That’s where Paycor can help.
Paycor Talent Development will move you beyond the once-a-year performance review so you can create a culture of continuous development, anchored in your company’s OKRs. Our solution helps you align your workforce to your company’s top priorities, and it shows employees where they’re making the biggest impact. With automated workflows, prompts, tasks and notifications, we remove the manual burden on Admins, Managers and Employees and allow teams to easily see upcoming activities and ensure all priorities are being met. This low touch highly effective platform gives everyone time back in their days to focus on what really matters.
 Previous:
Next:
Stay up to date with the latest HR trends

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Employee satisfaction surveys are a great way to stay in tune with what your employees are thinking. Get real insights on how to engage and motivate your team.

        Article      
Read Time: 10 min
Employee burnout can impact work quality and morale. Discover the warning signs for burnout and how to prevent it in your workplace.

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Being an effective leader requires more than just technical knowledge. Create an environment where everyone can thrive and understand emotions in oneself and others.
HCM Software
HR + Payroll Software
Talent Management
Workforce Management
Employee Experience
Benefits Administration
Quick Links
Services + Support
855-565-3285
Talk to Sales
855-752-8564
© 2023 Paycor, Inc  |  Refer Paycor  |  Privacy Policy  |  1-800-501-9462 |
*Represents approximately 30,000 corporate clients covering 40,000 businesses employing people