How to Create a Sabbatical Policy [Downloadable Sample Included]

An increasing number of forward-thinking companies are offering sabbatical leave to their employees. Craft your program by starting with our free sabbatical policy template.

Employee Experience
Last Updated: August 2, 2021 | Read Time: 7 min
More than half of workers experienced symptoms of burnout in the past year, according to recent polling. Many employees desperately need a break, and a couple weeks at the beach won’t cut it. A few months away from work and a chance to pursue personal projects might do the trick. That’s why an increasing number of forward-thinking companies are offering sabbatical leave as an employee benefit.
Sabbatical leave gives employees the opportunity to step away from the workplace for an extended period of time, while retaining their position. The concept of a sabbatical originated in biblical times, when those who worked in the fields took a year-long break every 7 years. ‘Sabbaticals’ of 6 months or a year have traditionally been available to university faculty, researched and medical professionals, but can give long-term employees in any industry a chance to pursue their passions outside of work before returning refreshed and re-energized.
Employees take sabbaticals for many reasons, including completing an advanced degree or specialized training, carrying out a community service project, taking an extended trip, or, in general, using the time to “reboot” a career and rebalance priorities. Some companies ask for details on why a sabbatical is being requested and others do not. Many employers grant sabbatical leave at certain milestones, for instance every 5 or 10 years of employment, or based on an application process.
Sabbatical leave can often benefit both the employee and the employer. Employers who offer sabbaticals give their valued, long-term leaders an opportunity to come back to the job with a new perspective and a deeper commitment to a company that has demonstrated a concern for their work/life balance. Offering sabbatical leave also differentiates employers in a crowded job market.
The reality is, in cases where employees take a sabbatical, the alternative would almost always be worse. Either an employee would simply leave the company for good or, worse, they’ll stick around for fear of losing their job but remain burned out and uninspired. Sabbaticals give employees the time and space they need to find their focus, without risking losing their job.
Sabbatical leave programs are not without risks. These include increased workload for HR staff administering the program and the possibility that an employee might decide to not return to work after their leave. There’s a corporate culture element to consider, as well—how will team members react when someone is allowed to leave for several months and return to his or her role? Companies may also find it a challenge to find the right candidate to temporary backfill the absent employee’s role.
Although the concept is growing in popularity, it’s important to outline how sabbatical leave is different from PTO, which is generally a much shorter duration, or medical leave, which is time off to deal with a specific medical problem suffered by the employee or the employee’s immediate family.
Before writing your sabbatical leave policy, make sure you consult your local and state labor laws for any guidance on employee leave. As always, it’s essential to avoid any potentially discriminatory actions, so it’s important to create a fair and transparent policy and put it in writing.
Is your company ready to explore offering sabbatical leave to its employees? Our sample sabbatical leave policy is a good starting point. Once downloaded, the template can customized to meet the needs of your organization.
 Previous:
Next:
Stay up to date with the latest HR trends
HCM Software
HR + Payroll Software
Talent Management
Workforce Management
Employee Experience
Benefits Administration
Quick Links
Services + Support
855-565-3285
Talk to Sales
855-752-8564
© 2023 Paycor, Inc  |  Refer Paycor  |  Privacy Policy  |  1-800-501-9462 |
*Represents approximately 30,000 corporate clients covering 40,000 businesses employing people