Are Your Benefits Compliant Under ERISA?

The Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 (ERISA) has been amended to cover non-retirement accounts. Are you compliant with benefit requirements?

Benefits Administration
Last Updated: August 5, 2022 | Read Time: 6 min
By now you probably know that offering benefits to your employees comes with a few rules, thanks to an act known as ERISA. And, if you’re on top of it, you’ve probably already got a checklist ready to go to keep your organization out of hot water — non-compliance penalty fees could cost you! But, if you haven’t brushed up on the requirements in a while, don’t worry, we’ve got you covered.
Watch our Benefits Compliance webinar to learn about compliance requirements for benefits and solutions to common employer challenges.
ERISA or the Employee Retirement Income Security Act (ERISA) of 1974, was created to protect employees from retirement fund mismanagement and abuse. ERISA has since been amended to cover non-retirement accounts, which include group health plans for employee benefits such as medical, dental, vision, life/AD&D, short-term and long-term disability, flexible spending accounts, and health reimbursement arrangements. ERISA is mainly managed by the U.S. Department of Labor.
Amendments to ERISA:
Any employer that offers a retirement plan and/or a group-sponsored healthcare plan must follow ERISA notice, disclosure, and reporting requirements unless an exemption applies. Church organizations are often exempt from ERISA. There is no minimum number of employees that a business must have for ERISA to apply to the company.
Most private sector, employer-sponsored plans fall under ERISA, including 401 (k) plans. In an ERISA plan, an employer chooses the investment options, controls the deposit and timing of employee contributions, and may offer a matching contribution.
In a non-ERISA plan, an employer does not contribute, is not involved in investments, and only manages compliance activities. ERISA does not typically cover retirement plans for religious organizations, some public education systems, and government.
ERISA does not cover group health plans that are maintained solely to comply with workers’ compensation, unemployment, or disability laws.
Penalties for not complying with ERISA requirements are as follows:
Don’t risk high penalty fees related to ERISA. With notifications, alerts, and reminders, Paycor empowers HR leaders by eliminating and automating tasks, especially for the benefits administration process. Paycor Benefits Advisor drives efficiencies by offering customized reporting for your benefits compliance needs.
 Previous:
Next:
Stay up to date with the latest HR trends

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Employee satisfaction surveys are a great way to stay in tune with what your employees are thinking. Get real insights on how to engage and motivate your team.

        Article      
Read Time: 10 min
Employee burnout can impact work quality and morale. Discover the warning signs for burnout and how to prevent it in your workplace.

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Being an effective leader requires more than just technical knowledge. Create an environment where everyone can thrive and understand emotions in oneself and others.
HCM Software
HR + Payroll Software
Talent Management
Workforce Management
Employee Experience
Benefits Administration
Quick Links
Services + Support
855-565-3285
Talk to Sales
855-752-8564
© 2023 Paycor, Inc  |  Refer Paycor  |  Privacy Policy  |  1-800-501-9462 |
*Represents approximately 30,000 corporate clients covering 40,000 businesses employing people