Finding Your Path: Nursing Careers in Long Term Care

Long term care (LTC) is a high demand area for nurses. See the career paths and estimated salaries for the industry.

Talent Management
Last Updated: July 14, 2021 | Read Time: 7 min
One of the fastest growing, high-demand areas of service for nurses today is in long term care (LTC). Our country’s Baby Boomer population is quickly aging and filling the rooms of assisted living facilities, creating a growing demand for many types of nursing careers in those areas. The Bureau of Labor and Statistics estimates an overall 19 percent growth by 2022 for registered nursing positions, which is much higher than the average rate in other job sectors.
There are a wide range of job opportunities available in the long term care industry from entry level positions in patient care, kitchen staff, maintenance and security. For people interested in patient care, there are many rewarding roles along the nursing career path. The key to progressing up the salary ladder, however, is education.
In order to help your nursing staff identify and plan out their LTC nursing careers, let’s consider some of the various roles, duties and salary ranges for long term care nurses, and what training is required to become one.
Depending on their specific career goals, prospective nurses may choose to start their career by becoming a Certified Nursing Assistant (CNA). Others who are willing to complete a more extensive education may become a Licensed Practicing Nurse (LPN) or a Registered Nurse (RN).
Some nurses continue their education and attain a Master of Science in Nursing (MSN) degree. Obviously, each level requires a bigger commitment and investment in education and training, but the average salary increases as well. Use the information below as a benchmark to determine if your salaries should be adjusted in order to attract new hires.
Education: 4 to 12 weeks, diploma
Average Salary: $30,000
LTC Duties and Responsibilities
Certified Nursing Assistants typically work under the direct supervision of an RN, performing a wide range of duties. They are responsible for basic patient care such as helping residents with dressing, bathing, and eating. They may also be required to collect non-invasive specimens and gather vital signs. And depending on individual state regulations, CNAs may also deliver patient medications.
Education: 1 to 2 years, associate degree
Average Salary: $48,000
LTC Duties and Responsibilities
Licensed Practical Nurses provide more technical assistance to long term care residents such as changing dressings and administering medications. An LPN may also be called on to manage and supervise nursing aides in their duties.
Education: 2 to 4 years, Bachelor of Science
Average Salary: $73,000
LTC Duties and Responsibilities
A registered nurse works closely with a medical team to implement a comprehensive healthcare plan, including vital sign checks, intravenous therapy, enteral tube feedings, wound care, respiratory therapy and medication among other duties. Registered nurses often take on leadership roles by supervising a staff of CNAs. They may also perform physical therapy and educate patients about their health conditions and ongoing treatments.
Education: Master’s degree
Average Salary: $113,000
LTC Duties and Responsibilities
Nurses with a MSN will take on greater leadership and management roles within the long term care facility. MSN programs typically offer two options: non-clinical or advanced practice. Nurses working towards a non-clinical MSN will be eligible for managerial or educational opportunities. An advanced practice degree (APRN) is more geared for a career outside of long term care, for nurses seeking to become a Certified Registered Nurse Practitioner or a Certified Nurse Midwife.
Education: Doctor or Nursing Practice
Average Salary: $135,000+
Career Options
Typically, nurses who choose to go on to earn a DNP are seeking to work in either a research role or as a nurse practitioner. A nurse with a DNP can function in a provider capacity but most will also work to generate new scientific and clinical knowledge in nursing and healthcare. For this reason, most DNPs also work in academia, as administrators and/or researchers.
A career in nursing offers many rewarding opportunities in a wide variety of settings. Some people start working as a CNA before deciding if they want to invest more time and money in furthering their education. There are always opportunities for nurses to continue their training as they gain more work experience.
Being part of a healthcare HR team means helping each nurse on your staff determine their own career goals and find the right path to succeed. Paycor’s Career Management solution can help you define role responsibilities and set expectations with your staff so employees receive feedback that’s specific to their development plan.
 Previous:
Next:
Stay up to date with the latest HR trends

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Employee satisfaction surveys are a great way to stay in tune with what your employees are thinking. Get real insights on how to engage and motivate your team.

        Article      
Read Time: 10 min
Employee burnout can impact work quality and morale. Discover the warning signs for burnout and how to prevent it in your workplace.

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Being an effective leader requires more than just technical knowledge. Create an environment where everyone can thrive and understand emotions in oneself and others.
HCM Software
HR + Payroll Software
Talent Management
Workforce Management
Employee Experience
Benefits Administration
Quick Links
Services + Support
855-565-3285
Talk to Sales
855-752-8564
© 2023 Paycor, Inc  |  Refer Paycor  |  Privacy Policy  |  1-800-501-9462 |
*Represents approximately 30,000 corporate clients covering 40,000 businesses employing people