New Employee Announcement Email Template [Downloadable]

Giving your new hires a great welcome is so important. Get a free customizable new employee announcement template here.

Employee Experience
Last Updated: November 11, 2020 | Read Time: 6 min
Hiring a new employee is exciting but it also brings challenges. It’s up to leaders to make sure that a new hire feels welcome, which isn’t always easy, especially if an employee will be working remotely. To make the onboarding process as smooth as possible, you need the help of your team. Everyone plays a part in welcoming an employee—and it all starts with an employee announcement email.
You’ve found the perfect candidate and it’s natural to have high expectations. But you can’t expect to just throw someone into their role and have them figure it out all by themselves. For a new hire to be successfully integrated into your department, you need your current employees to lend a hand.
But your team can’t help out if they don’t know anything about your new employee. That’s why an announcement email is so important. It’s your chance to give everyone the lowdown on who the new hire is and what role they’ll play.
The seniority of the new hire will often dictate who gets emailed. For senior roles, a welcome email will be company-wide. For regular hires, though, it’s most important to inform the department in which the employee will be working. There’s a lot you can include:
Onboarding is a process and this email is just one step. Having your whole team welcome the new hire is great, but it’s also good practice to arrange a series of 1:1 introductory meetings so they can develop personal connections with those they’ll be working closely with.
To be sure your onboarding is the best it can be, consider using HR software. Paycor Onboarding streamlines and optimizes onboarding, reducing paperwork and giving you the tools you need to connect with new hires in an engaging way
.
You don’t get a second chance at a first impression—that’s why giving new hires a great welcome is so important. Writing a great announcement to welcome the employee, giving your team everything they need to know about their future colleague, plays an important part. To help businesses, Paycor is offering a free template.
Javascript is required to interact with this content.
 Previous:
Next:
Stay up to date with the latest HR trends
HCM Software
HR + Payroll Software
Talent Management
Workforce Management
Employee Experience
Benefits Administration
Quick Links
Services + Support
855-565-3285
Talk to Sales
855-752-8564
© 2023 Paycor, Inc  |  Refer Paycor  |  Privacy Policy  |  1-800-501-9462 |
*Represents approximately 30,000 corporate clients covering 40,000 businesses employing people