Policies to Prevent Employee Lawsuits

Organizations face a threat of litigation initiated by non complianc and disgruntled employees. Stay one step ahead of employee lawsuits by starting here.

Employee Experience
Last Updated:  December 28, 2017 | Read Time: 5 min
Human resources leaders we’ve interviewed and surveyed about the current state of HR and human capital management identified finding and retaining employees as their top challenge. Running a close second on the list was maintaining HR compliance, specifically developing, communicating and enforcing policies and procedures across the organization.
Why do managing employee policies create such a challenge for HR? For starters, the vast number of rules HR must know and maintain is overwhelming, and they often lack the resources to keep up with constantly changing updates. Plus, without dedicated ownership, important details could fall off HR’s radar, resulting in the potential for employee lawsuits or costly fines. But the #1 reason people management compliance is so challenging for employers: an employee could sue you at any moment. You might be thinking, “our people love us, it won’t happen here,” but it only takes one disgruntled employee, justified or not, to file a lawsuit against your organization. And if you don’t have the proper policies and documentation in place to defend your actions, you’ll have little ground to stand on.
In this article, we’ll examine policies organizations should have in place to minimize the risk of damaging audits and costly employee lawsuits. Here’s where to start:
Your employee handbook is your organization’s bible. It’s the go-to resource where company policies and procedures are clearly and consistently communicated, and managers and employees alike depend on the handbook for education and guidance. And in the event of employee litigation, a comprehensive and updated handbook can greatly minimize your risk.
Does an HR professional or legal counsel reviews your employee handbook annually?
Why are job descriptions important? They set specific expectations for employee performance and offer a guidepost to measure individual success. Job descriptions also are used throughout the recruiting process to identify a certain skill set candidates must possess to apply for a position.
Accurate performance records are essential in the event an employee is terminated due to poor performance. Affected employees should be placed on a performance plan that defines required areas for improvement and offers a time frame to achieve results.
Accurately documenting and tracking disciplinary violations is essential in the event an employee is terminated. Without proper documentation, a terminated employee can pursue legal action against the employer.
Wrongful termination
Termination meetings are conducted by an HR representative and supervisor, notifying the employee of the termination, discussing the return of company property and facilitating the employee’s departure. A summary of the meeting and related documents are captured and stored in the employee’s personnel file.
Departing employees receive a written summary of accrued benefits and notices regarding post-termination benefits, including compensation for vacation and sick time, continuation of health coverage, severance pay and 401(k) plan information.
Procedures are defined for collecting company property from the terminated/departing employee.
If you’re feeling increasingly confident about your HR policies and procedures, take a few minutes to review complete Compliance Regulation Overview to learn how specific government regulations impact your business.
 Previous:
Next:
Stay up to date with the latest HR trends

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Employee satisfaction surveys are a great way to stay in tune with what your employees are thinking. Get real insights on how to engage and motivate your team.

        Article      
Read Time: 10 min
Employee burnout can impact work quality and morale. Discover the warning signs for burnout and how to prevent it in your workplace.

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Being an effective leader requires more than just technical knowledge. Create an environment where everyone can thrive and understand emotions in oneself and others.
HCM Software
HR + Payroll Software
Talent Management
Workforce Management
Employee Experience
Benefits Administration
Quick Links
Services + Support
855-565-3285
Talk to Sales
855-752-8564
© 2023 Paycor, Inc  |  Refer Paycor  |  Privacy Policy  |  1-800-501-9462 |
*Represents approximately 30,000 corporate clients covering 40,000 businesses employing people