Mandatory Direct Deposit By State

Most employers offer direct deposit, but does it mandatory? Find out the direct deposit laws in your state here.

Employee Experience
Last Updated:  December 24, 2020 | Read Time: 13 min
Ninety-three percent of U.S. employee are paid by direct deposit, according to the American Payroll Association’s “Getting Paid in America” Survey. It’s by far the most popular payment method, but that doesn’t mean there aren’t employees who’d prefer to receive a traditional printed paycheck.
Can you make direct deposit mandatory for your employees? Yes… and no. Like most things in HR, it all depends on the employment law in your state and the classification of employees.
To help businesses, we’ve prepared this table so you can easily track the mandatory direct deposit laws wherever you are.
Public Sector: No
Public sector: The Commissioner of Labor & Industry may require direct deposit for all state employees
State government: Yes
Employers subject to the WPCA: No
Depending on state laws, employers can require their employees to receive payments via direct deposit. In some states, receiving direct deposits can even be included as a condition of employment. However, even these states have some restrictions you need to know.
They include:
*If an employee doesn’t have a bank account, direct deposit payments can still be made via a paycard.
If you provide direct deposit to your employees, you may also be required to provide them with a pay stub if it’s required in your state. Federal law does not mandate pay stubs for workers, but the Fair Labor Standards Act requires employers to keep accurate records of employees’ wages and hours worked. Your state might not require employer-issued pay stubs, but an employee has the right to request payroll records.
For instance, printed pay stubs are mandatory in Arizona, Colorado, Connecticut, Hawaii, Iowa, Maine, Minnesota, New Mexico, North Carolina, Texas and Vermont. However, most of these states now allow employers to use electronic pay stubs as long as three standards are met:
Several states do not require you to provide pay stubs all: Arkansas, Florida, Louisiana, Mississippi, Nebraska, South Dakota, Tennessee and Virginia. The remaining states require some type of pay stub, whether in print or available electronically, such as via an Employee Mobile app.
Besides having benefits for both employers and employees, direct deposit is fast, simple and accurate. Pay discrepancies are easily resolved without checks getting lost in the mail or stolen. There are countless advantages over paychecks, here are just a few:
When employees have easy access to funds and paystubs, they can spend less time on banking and more time impacting your organizations bottom line.
Paycor is not a legal, tax, benefit, accounting or investment advisor. All communication from Paycor should be confirmed by your company’s legal, tax, benefit, accounting or investment advisor before making any decisions.
Paycor’s payroll & tax software is the easiest and most powerful solution for medium and small businesses. We don’t usually brag, but in this case, there’s no other way to say it: we’ve perfected payroll. Learn why 30,000 medium and small-sized businesses partner with Paycor.
 Previous:
Next:
Stay up to date with the latest HR trends

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Employee satisfaction surveys are a great way to stay in tune with what your employees are thinking. Get real insights on how to engage and motivate your team.

        Article      
Read Time: 10 min
Employee burnout can impact work quality and morale. Discover the warning signs for burnout and how to prevent it in your workplace.

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Being an effective leader requires more than just technical knowledge. Create an environment where everyone can thrive and understand emotions in oneself and others.
HCM Software
HR + Payroll Software
Talent Management
Workforce Management
Employee Experience
Benefits Administration
Quick Links
Services + Support
855-565-3285
Talk to Sales
855-752-8564
© 2023 Paycor, Inc  |  Refer Paycor  |  Privacy Policy  |  1-800-501-9462 |
*Represents approximately 30,000 corporate clients covering 40,000 businesses employing people