The Pros and Cons of Flexible Work Arrangements

Job candidates love hearing employers offer flexible work arrangements. But there are downsides too. Read the pros and cons here.

Employee Experience
Last Updated:  July 8, 2019 | Read Time: 6 min
Back in the day, the primary determining factor for a candidate choosing your company over your competitors’ was salary. Nowadays, the tide is turning toward the employee benefits your company offers; specifically, flexible work arrangements. In fact, FlexJobs 2018 Annual Survey found that the top three factors today’s candidates look for in a job are:

Companies that offer flexible work arrangements reap big rewards, from access to top talent to increased retention rates. Enabling employees to work from home on a regular basis can also boost overhead cost savings when you’re not required to maintain office space for everyone. You’ll likely see improved attendance and productivity, as well as increased employee engagement when employees’ work days are more fluid, allowing them more freedom than that of a full-time position tethered to an office chair.
Offering a flexible work schedule to your employees is a highly appreciated perk. It gives them a greater say over their work schedules, so they can efficiently balance their work and family obligations.
According to a study conducted by the International Foundation of Employee Benefit Plans (Flexible Work Arrangements), 94% of employers surveyed said they provide some sort of flexible scheduling for their employees.

But a flex time arrangement can also have its downsides. For example, when you have a distributed workforce, your business can be challenged by a lack of connection among team members. And when a team member works from home, lines between work life and home life will often blur causing managers to question employee productivity and actual hours worked. So, is it for your company? Let’s start with a few questions and considerations:
 If they have, carefully think through the potential implications. If your entire work environment is one that operates on shifts or requires a hands-on presence, of course, such scheduling wouldn’t work for you. But if your employees primarily work on computers (data entry, programming or technical writing, etc.) some flexibility in scheduling, compressed work weeks, or remote work for certain periods of time could be appropriate. For example, allowing employees to get to work at 9:00 and leave at 4:00 can help them avoid rush hour and improve their work/life balance and stress levels. Listen to your employees’ requests and see if it makes sense to implement a more generous policy.
 If they have difficulties completing their job requirements when they’re actually in the office, they sure won’t be successful working remotely. And a lot of people really enjoy the camaraderie of the office making a remote role isolating and unmotivating for them. It’s important to consider everyone in the company on a case-by-case basis rather than creating a blanket policy. And that leads us to the next question.
 As an example, you can’t have a policy offering flexible working arrangements to parents only. If you have a flexible work schedule, you’re required to apply the policy across the board (where it makes sense) so you don’t discriminate against protected groups.
 It’s important that you have a formal written policy in your employee handbook that notes the details of the program, such as when employees must be in the office for meetings. You should also determine the hours employees should be available and accessible during the work day. Be sure to have your employees sign the policy to acknowledge that they will abide by the rules of the program. You should also specifically note that the flexible work arrangement is conducted on a trial basis and employees may be asked to return to an in-office schedule if it’s deemed that the flex work program isn’t working out with them.
  If company expansion has resulted in people being packed in like sardines, a telecommute policy for certain employees can eliminate the need for relocating to a bigger space.
Our HR solution helps you become more efficient, while connecting you with your employees through modern, intuitive solutions. From engaging employee self-service to unlimited workflows, Perform HR takes the burden off you and makes it easier to connect with your people. Your everyday processes become simplified, allowing you to focus on your most important work. To learn more, explore our HR and Benefits software.

 Previous:
Next:
Stay up to date with the latest HR trends

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Employee satisfaction surveys are a great way to stay in tune with what your employees are thinking. Get real insights on how to engage and motivate your team.

        Article      
Read Time: 10 min
Employee burnout can impact work quality and morale. Discover the warning signs for burnout and how to prevent it in your workplace.

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Being an effective leader requires more than just technical knowledge. Create an environment where everyone can thrive and understand emotions in oneself and others.
HCM Software
HR + Payroll Software
Talent Management
Workforce Management
Employee Experience
Benefits Administration
Quick Links
Services + Support
855-565-3285
Talk to Sales
855-752-8564
© 2023 Paycor, Inc  |  Refer Paycor  |  Privacy Policy  |  1-800-501-9462 |
*Represents approximately 30,000 corporate clients covering 40,000 businesses employing people