Powerful and Flexible Time Clock Software

Paycor time clock software allows employees to clock in & out of shifts via web or mobile app. Request your product demo today!

Employee Experience
Last Updated:  January 9, 2020 | Read Time: 3 min
Paycor’s time clock software makes employee timekeeping easy. You need to have confidence in your timesheets—our multiple time clock options help you collect timesheets you can trust.
Error-free timesheet data is created when any employee clocks in or out from their shift, removing any need for manual editing. Managers can quickly review, approve and process timesheets in seconds within the time clock software. Whether they’re in the office or on the move, it only takes a few clicks.
It’s easy to see who’s clocked in, from where and when with our time clock app. Real-time data paints a clear picture of who’s available across any number of locations, wherever you are. With these insights, employees can be managed smarter to maximize productivity with the team managers available.

 Previous:
Next:
Stay up to date with the latest HR trends

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Employee satisfaction surveys are a great way to stay in tune with what your employees are thinking. Get real insights on how to engage and motivate your team.

        Article      
Read Time: 10 min
Employee burnout can impact work quality and morale. Discover the warning signs for burnout and how to prevent it in your workplace.

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Being an effective leader requires more than just technical knowledge. Create an environment where everyone can thrive and understand emotions in oneself and others.
HCM Software
HR + Payroll Software
Talent Management
Workforce Management
Employee Experience
Benefits Administration
Quick Links
Services + Support
855-565-3285
Talk to Sales
855-752-8564
© 2023 Paycor, Inc  |  Refer Paycor  |  Privacy Policy  |  1-800-501-9462 |
*Represents approximately 30,000 corporate clients covering 40,000 businesses employing people