How to Help Your Clients Find Metrics that Matter

As a trusted advisor, encourage your clients and CFOs to help their HR teams become more data-driven. See the 6 metrics that matter, here.

Employee Experience
Last Updated:  October 3, 2019 | Read Time: 1 min
The answer to some of your clients’ most pressing business problems are in their HR data. After reviewing proprietary data from nearly 3,000 Paycor clients, we found the most successful HR teams map people management metrics to business outcomes. Measuring the data that matters most to the C-suite makes HR invaluable.
And they need the CFO to lead the way.
As a trusted advisor, encourage your clients and CFOs to help their HR teams become more data-driven and track metrics by asking a few simple questions. And if their HR & Payroll platform is incapable of giving them answers (as well as explaining the “why” behind the “what”), maybe it’s time they switch to a new provider.
Paycor Analytics takes the complexity out of workforce analysis and planning by empowering HR leaders and CFOs with high-impact, easy-to-consume, real-time data insights at their fingertips. Check out our infographic to discover the 6 questions that will help your clients become more data driven.
 Previous:
Next:
Stay up to date with the latest HR trends

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Employee satisfaction surveys are a great way to stay in tune with what your employees are thinking. Get real insights on how to engage and motivate your team.

        Article      
Read Time: 10 min
Employee burnout can impact work quality and morale. Discover the warning signs for burnout and how to prevent it in your workplace.

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Being an effective leader requires more than just technical knowledge. Create an environment where everyone can thrive and understand emotions in oneself and others.
HCM Software
HR + Payroll Software
Talent Management
Workforce Management
Employee Experience
Benefits Administration
Quick Links
Services + Support
855-565-3285
Talk to Sales
855-752-8564
© 2023 Paycor, Inc  |  Refer Paycor  |  Privacy Policy  |  1-800-501-9462 |
*Represents approximately 30,000 corporate clients covering 40,000 businesses employing people