Employee Efficiency: 12 Tips to Increase Productivity

Disengaged workers can negatively impact the bottom line. Check out this article for 12 ways to increase employee productivity.

Employee Experience
Last Updated:  October 3, 2019 | Read Time: 8 min
Labor costs are the number one expense for most businesses, so it’s important to make sure you’re getting the most bang for your buck. Disengaged workers cause massive losses in productivity – between $450 and $500 billion annually.
Businesses that want their companies to prosper should focus their efforts on employee well-being and engagement to improve efficiency. It is also just as vital to look at ways to improve the overall company culture to help make everyone more productive.
Looking to enhance the efficiency of your employees? Check out these tips you can implement today:
Paycor is hyper-focused on the employee experience, from hire to retire with the goal of creating engaged and productive employees. To give you a glimpse of our expertise, here are some tips on how you can build a culture of engagement, based on extensive interviews with successful HR teams.
For more on the employee experience, visit Paycor’s HR Center of Excellence
 Previous:
Next:
Stay up to date with the latest HR trends

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Employee satisfaction surveys are a great way to stay in tune with what your employees are thinking. Get real insights on how to engage and motivate your team.

        Article      
Read Time: 10 min
Employee burnout can impact work quality and morale. Discover the warning signs for burnout and how to prevent it in your workplace.

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Being an effective leader requires more than just technical knowledge. Create an environment where everyone can thrive and understand emotions in oneself and others.
HCM Software
HR + Payroll Software
Talent Management
Workforce Management
Employee Experience
Benefits Administration
Quick Links
Services + Support
855-565-3285
Talk to Sales
855-752-8564
© 2023 Paycor, Inc  |  Refer Paycor  |  Privacy Policy  |  1-800-501-9462 |
*Represents approximately 30,000 corporate clients covering 40,000 businesses employing people