HR challenges are keeping CFOs up at night

A good CFO is concerned with a lot of the same things a human resources department is. Find out why.

Workforce Management
Last Updated:  June 13, 2018 | Read Time: 4 min
It’s not always all about the Benjamins for CFOs (well… it is in a roundabout way). A good CFO is also concerned with a lot of the same things HR is. Human resources pressures don’t solely have an impact on that team, they also have an unmistakable ripple effect on your clients’ CFOs and their companies as a whole. In fact, according to the Duke CFO magazine Global Business Outlook survey (U.S. First Quarter, 2018), five of the top six challenges CFOs say they’re facing can be directly tied to the human resources department:
At Paycor, we found that 75% of successful, high-functioning HR teams focus on six “pillars” of HR: Recruiting, Benefits, Labor Costs, Compliance, People Management, and Employee Experience.
Unfortunately, we also found that 66% of CFOs perceive that their HR departments have an “average” or “worse than average” impact on the organization. That’s a problem because HR is responsible for managing employees, an organization’s greatest asset and greatest compliance risk. These days, CFOs are shouldering the pretty big burden of helping their organizations make smart decisions when it comes to their people. Compliance is a big piece of that puzzle.
Your clients’ human capital propels business success. And success is, of course, linked to the talents and abilities of their employees. With the economic recovery we’ve seen over the past several years – and because employment is at an 18-year low making finding top talent a huge challenge – CFOs are taking a closer look at their human capital to maximize their existing resources. So, finding and retaining top talent is no longer just the worry of human resources professionals; CFOs say it is a continual – and increasing – concern.
More than 60% of recruiters expect to hire more people in 2018 than they did in 2017, and 42% of employers are worried they won’t be able to find enough talent . That’s a whole lot of recruiting in the foreseeable future and a whole lot of compliance to keep up with right at the start of the employee lifecycle.
If your clients are managing their HR with disparate systems that don’t share data, or worse, by using manual spreadsheets, there’s no way they can possibly have a solid grasp on forecasting their labor costs, employee classifications, and overtime costs.
Without an automated, all-in-one HR software system, they’re not only throwing money down the drain, they’re also setting their companies up for some pretty stiff fines (and potential legal woes) for being out of compliance.
As their adviser, it’s important that you help your clients understand why it’s so vital to the success of their businesses that they make accurate, automated HR practices a top priority. Finding the best talent is going to continue being a challenge for the foreseeable future. And, as laws and regulations change on a seemingly daily basis, the compliance landscape is getting more difficult to navigate. They need your wisdom.
Enter your email below to receive a weekly recap of the latest articles
from Paycor’s Resource Center.


MktoForms2.loadForm("//app-ab01.marketo.com", "003-JWW-697", 1796);
Check your inbox
for an email confirming your subscription. Enjoy!
 Previous:
Next:
Stay up to date with the latest HR trends

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Employee satisfaction surveys are a great way to stay in tune with what your employees are thinking. Get real insights on how to engage and motivate your team.

        Article      
Read Time: 10 min
Employee burnout can impact work quality and morale. Discover the warning signs for burnout and how to prevent it in your workplace.

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Being an effective leader requires more than just technical knowledge. Create an environment where everyone can thrive and understand emotions in oneself and others.
HCM Software
HR + Payroll Software
Talent Management
Workforce Management
Employee Experience
Benefits Administration
Quick Links
Services + Support
855-565-3285
Talk to Sales
855-752-8564
© 2023 Paycor, Inc  |  Refer Paycor  |  Privacy Policy  |  1-800-501-9462 |
*Represents approximately 30,000 corporate clients covering 40,000 businesses employing people