Are Employees Entitled to Paid Time Off to Vote? (22 States Say Yes)

22 states in the US offer employees paid time off to vote. See if the state you call home is on the list!

Workforce Management
Last Updated:  September 30, 2020 | Read Time: 4 min
The United States was built on the principle of self-governance or autonomy, and the primary method most people use to exercise that right is by casting a vote for the people or the laws that most closely represent their personal values.
While this right is a very important one, today there’s no federal law that requires employers to provide time off from work for voters and Election Day isn’t considered a holiday the way it is in many other countries. On a positive note, though, many states require businesses to provide paid or unpaid time off so their employees can vote.
The 2020 election is coming soon, so now is the time for businesses to get familiar with employee voting rights in their state. But it’s also worth going beyond what’s required, and offering employees all the time they need to carry out their civic duty.
Providing paid time off (PTO) to vote is required in 22 states; unpaid time off is required in seven more.
Most states that require paid time off allow the employee to take two to three hours to vote, which is typically a reasonable amount of time for tackling long lines. Some states’ laws say that an employee can take time off for “as long as it reasonably takes to vote.” Additionally, other states require proof of voting in order for an employee to receive time off with pay.

(The state of Mississippi mandates time off for employees to vote but it doesn’t specify if it’s paid or unpaid time.)
Oregon and Washington don’t mandate paid or unpaid time off for voting; however, those are the only two states that allow their citizens to cast their ballots by mail so an employee shouldn’t have the need to take time off.
This year, many large companies (including Starbucks and Microsoft) aren’t just offering time for employees to vote, they are encouraging them to play an even more important role in the democratic process by training as poll workers. Others businesses are going one step further and offering Election Day as a paid, business-wide holiday, independent of state laws.
If that’s not something in the cards for a company, though, the employer may specify the hours an employee can be away from work in order to cast their vote. By providing sufficient time for employees to vote, a business can help ensure that their civic duties are met, even if it isn’t mandated by state law. It’s the right move for your employees—and the country.
Check out our sample PTO policy for small and medium sized businesses. If your hands or full, Paycor can help. Our HR technology and expertise can guide you through the complexities of compliance and mitigate risk. Learn how.

 Previous:
Next:
Stay up to date with the latest HR trends

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Employee satisfaction surveys are a great way to stay in tune with what your employees are thinking. Get real insights on how to engage and motivate your team.

        Article      
Read Time: 10 min
Employee burnout can impact work quality and morale. Discover the warning signs for burnout and how to prevent it in your workplace.

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Being an effective leader requires more than just technical knowledge. Create an environment where everyone can thrive and understand emotions in oneself and others.
HCM Software
HR + Payroll Software
Talent Management
Workforce Management
Employee Experience
Benefits Administration
Quick Links
Services + Support
855-565-3285
Talk to Sales
855-752-8564
© 2023 Paycor, Inc  |  Refer Paycor  |  Privacy Policy  |  1-800-501-9462 |
*Represents approximately 30,000 corporate clients covering 40,000 businesses employing people