Domestic Violence Leave Laws by State

There are several ways employers can help employees affected by domestic violence issues, including a domestic violence leave of absence. Learn how it works.

Workforce Management
Last Updated: June 8, 2022 | Read Time: 15 min
More than 10 million adults experience domestic violence annually; that accounts for 1 in 3 women and 1 in 9 men. And unfortunately, domestic violence cases rose significantly since the pandemic; about 25-33% in 2020 alone. Although domestic violence issues are often unreported and difficult to discuss, there are several ways empowered employers can help employees in need. One of which is through a domestic violence leave of absence, which we will discuss in this article.
Domestic violence is defined as any type of violent or aggressive behavior inflicted on another person within a home or within a relationship. Domestic violence can take the form of physical abuse, stalking, sexual abuse, emotional abuse, economic abuse, psychological abuse, threats or cyberstalking; and is also referred to as domestic abuse or intimate partner violence.
So, what is domestic violence leave? In many states, employers are required to grant time off to employees who have suffered violence from a domestic violence incident. Requirements vary by state, but in many cases, leave is granted for the following:
It is often the responsibility of the employee to notify the employer, if possible, through a written statement, a copy of a court order, police report or through other formal means. The laws in each state are minimum requirements, but employers have the right to create policies that will best serve their employee populations.
FMLA allows for up to 12 weeks of unpaid leave for the care for a spouse, child, or parent of employee with a serious health condition, or for the employee’s own serious health condition. Because many victims of domestic violence suffer from injuries, impairments or serious mental conditions, issues related to domestic violence can comprise a serious health condition. However, FMLA is only for employers with more than 50 employees, which is why many states have enacted their own version of FMLA or specific protections for victims of crime, sexual assault or domestic violence.
To date, 25 states and the District of Columbia have passed laws or acts giving victims of domestic violence the right to take time off work: Arizona, California, Connecticut, Colorado, Florida, Hawaii, Illinois, Kansas, Maine, Maryland, Massachusetts Michigan, Minnesota, Missouri, Nevada, New Hampshire, New Jersey, New Mexico, North Carolina, Oregon, Rhode Island, Utah, Vermont and Washington. It’s important to note that some states such as New Jersey, also require the law to be posted in a place where employees can view it, so that they know their rights.
Ensure the channels of communication with your employees are always open, especially about circumstances as serious as domestic violence. With Paycor Mobile, you can keep employees informed of policy updates, provide access to schedules, allow then to request time off all while protecting their most sensitive information.
Paycor creates Human Capital Management (HCM) software for leaders who want to make a difference. Our HCM platform modernizes every aspect of people management, from recruiting, onboarding and paying associates, to developing and retaining them. But what really sets us apart is our focus on business leaders. For over 30 years, we’ve been listening to and partnering with leaders, so we know what they need: HR technology that saves time, powerful analytics that provide actionable insights and personalized support. That’s why more than 30,000 customers trust Paycor to help them solve problems and achieve their goals.
 Previous:
Next:
Stay up to date with the latest HR trends

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Employee satisfaction surveys are a great way to stay in tune with what your employees are thinking. Get real insights on how to engage and motivate your team.

        Article      
Read Time: 10 min
Employee burnout can impact work quality and morale. Discover the warning signs for burnout and how to prevent it in your workplace.

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Being an effective leader requires more than just technical knowledge. Create an environment where everyone can thrive and understand emotions in oneself and others.
HCM Software
HR + Payroll Software
Talent Management
Workforce Management
Employee Experience
Benefits Administration
Quick Links
Services + Support
855-565-3285
Talk to Sales
855-752-8564
© 2023 Paycor, Inc  |  Refer Paycor  |  Privacy Policy  |  1-800-501-9462 |
*Represents approximately 30,000 corporate clients covering 40,000 businesses employing people