Predictive Work Schedule Laws: A City-By-City Guide

Fair Workweek regulations promote fairer scheduling practices by employers. Avoid penalties and see the cities where the government laws apply.

Workforce Management
Last Updated: March, 25, 2021 | Read Time: 8 min
Predictive work schedule laws—also known as ‘Fair Workweek’ laws—promote fairer scheduling practices, require that companies give employees sufficient notice of work schedules and enforce penalties for late schedule changes.
Fair workweek laws typically require employers to:
On-call and just-in-time scheduling means that many Americans’ work schedules are unpredictable from month to month, week to week or even day to day. Nationwide, more than 8 million retail and food service workers receive less than seven days’ notice of upcoming shifts, suggest recent estimates.
On January 1, 2021, Chicago became the latest major American city to enforce work schedule laws. Days later, New York City strengthened its Fair Workweek legislation to protect against sudden reductions in shift-volume for fast food workers. Several other states also considering predictive schedule laws, which could mean compliance nightmares ahead for companies who operate in multiple jurisdictions.

The following places have passed predictive work schedule laws:
*Philadelphia mandates that schedule records be kept for 2 years. Every other locality requires 3 years.
The following states have prohibited local governments passing predictive work schedule laws:
Even if you aren’t affected by existing Fair Workweek laws, you might be soon—there’s a campaign for wide-ranging predictive work schedule laws at a federal level. Businesses of all sizes should be ready to inform employees of schedules in advance, and avoid schedules with minimal breaks between shifts.
Avoidance is easier than tracking predictability pay and if you don’t want labor costs to skyrocket, or to be caught short-staffed, that means putting a system in place to create more efficient schedules, quicker. At a minimum, you’ll want to digitize your records.
The thing is, it’s not just about staying compliant—scheduling instability increases employees’ psychological distress (U. of California). Better scheduling helps: the predictive work schedule law in Emeryville, in effect since 2017, has been shown to improve sleep quality and reduce stress levels for covered employees with young children (Duke University).
And that’s not all: stable scheduling can also improve business profitability, research suggests. Part of the story is that work life balance and flexibility is key to employee engagement, which in turn has a big effect on productivity and staff turnover.
Watch our Webinar: Are You Scheduling Like a Pro, to learn how Paycor Scheduling helps medium and small businesses increase productivity and track labor costs while staying compliant.
 Previous:
Next:
Stay up to date with the latest HR trends

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Employee satisfaction surveys are a great way to stay in tune with what your employees are thinking. Get real insights on how to engage and motivate your team.

        Article      
Read Time: 10 min
Employee burnout can impact work quality and morale. Discover the warning signs for burnout and how to prevent it in your workplace.

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Being an effective leader requires more than just technical knowledge. Create an environment where everyone can thrive and understand emotions in oneself and others.
HCM Software
HR + Payroll Software
Talent Management
Workforce Management
Employee Experience
Benefits Administration
Quick Links
Services + Support
855-565-3285
Talk to Sales
855-752-8564
© 2023 Paycor, Inc  |  Refer Paycor  |  Privacy Policy  |  1-800-501-9462 |
*Represents approximately 30,000 corporate clients covering 40,000 businesses employing people