What is Escheatment Law?

Escheatment is when an asset goes unclaimed and must be turned over to the state government. We've compiled a chart of state laws on escheatment to help you.

Workforce Management
Last Updated: March 8, 2022 | Read Time: 10 min
Paying employees can be complicated. Payroll managers and HR teams know even small errors are costly, so every decimal point needs to be in the right place. For example, after running payroll and sending salaries to employees, you might think your work is done. But what happens if an employee doesn’t accept the money? It happens more often than you might expect.
Escheatment is when an asset is unclaimed for a certain length of time, and must be turned over to state government. This doesn’t only happen to employee pay—dormant bank accounts, forgotten shares or uncashed dividend payments are all at risk. Escheatment also happens when someone dies with no identifiable heirs.
Once an asset has been escheated, the rightful owner or intended recipient must make a claim to the state to reclaim what is rightfully theirs. Each state has their own rules on how long it takes for unclaimed funds to become escheated, which vary depending on what sort of assets they are. 
States are always looking for more revenue and may audit businesses to identify any unclaimed property. Beware: the state law that applies depends on an employee’s last known address, even if that’s not where your company is located.
There are plenty of reasons an employee’s pay might become escheated. Most commonly, they simply forget to cash their check. Or, the check never got to them in the first place. An employee might’ve changed address without letting their company know. An employee might even choose not to collect their paycheck, if they are departing on bad terms and want to avoid visiting the workplace one last time. 
This isn’t just unfortunate—your business must take action. Here’s what you can do:
These procedures only apply if a check is over a certain amount. Read up on relevant state rules. Businesses who don’t report unclaimed pay face financial penalties. NB: even if a paycheck goes unclaimed, you’re still required to withhold and report all relevant payroll taxes.
Watch out for unclaimed assets belonging to former employees. If a 401(k) or other contribution plan is never cashed out, it could be escheated after a state audit. To avoid this situation, when you do hold assets belonging to a former employee, keep track of their contact details and address.
The length of time listed is how long it takes before unclaimed funds count as escheat. In some states, the figure listed may differ in certain circumstances. Consult state law for specific regulations on the escheatment process and guidelines on what actions businesses are required to take.
Paycor builds HR solutions for leaders. With Paycor, you can modernize every aspect of people management, from the way you recruit, onboard and develop your team, to the way you pay and retain them. 
Paycor is not a legal, tax, benefit, accounting or investment advisor. All communication from Paycor should be confirmed by your company’s legal, tax, benefit, accounting or investment advisor before making any decisions. 
 Previous:
Next:
Stay up to date with the latest HR trends

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Employee satisfaction surveys are a great way to stay in tune with what your employees are thinking. Get real insights on how to engage and motivate your team.

        Article      
Read Time: 10 min
Employee burnout can impact work quality and morale. Discover the warning signs for burnout and how to prevent it in your workplace.

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Being an effective leader requires more than just technical knowledge. Create an environment where everyone can thrive and understand emotions in oneself and others.
HCM Software
HR + Payroll Software
Talent Management
Workforce Management
Employee Experience
Benefits Administration
Quick Links
Services + Support
855-565-3285
Talk to Sales
855-752-8564
© 2023 Paycor, Inc  |  Refer Paycor  |  Privacy Policy  |  1-800-501-9462 |
*Represents approximately 30,000 corporate clients covering 40,000 businesses employing people