Why Isn’t My Job Posting Showing Up on Indeed?

Is your job posting on Indeed not showing up? We've got you covered. Here are our best insider tips on how to avoid this.

Talent Management
Last Updated: March 25, 2020 | Read Time: 6 min
When you first post a job to Indeed’s organic feed (or that of any other employment site), keep in mind that there is a delay. New jobs and updates will not appear on the job boards immediately. There is an unavoidable delay based on how often those job boards refresh their data.
Job Posting Delay Time Estimates
CareerBuilder: 15 minutes
LinkedIn: 12 hours
Glassdoor: Up to 24 hours
Indeed: 6 hours
Monster: 2 hours
If you find yourself waiting beyond the time frames listed above and your job still hasn’t appeared, this may be a sign that your job has been flagged as “spam” and blacklisted from the jobs feed.
The value of employment sites and job boards is derived directly from the quality of jobs that they provide job seekers. For this reason, job sites like Indeed place search quality (creating the best search experience for job seekers) as their number one priority.
To protect search quality, employment sites have entire teams that monitor job postings and utilize advanced algorithms to identify, flag, and weed out any jobs that are spammy, misleading, or predatory. For the most part, these safeguards work in the way that they are intended and do a great service for the job seeker. Sometimes, however, legitimate jobs can end up being flagged as spam.
Insider Tip: Want to keep your jobs from being blacklisted? Review the 5 factors below that may cause your jobs to be flagged as spam.

 With organic listings, part-time and temporary jobs are often flagged as spam. Whether you have “part-time” present in the title or “part-time/temporary” written down in the body of the job description, Indeed’s algorithms and search quality team may flag your job posting and suppress it from the organic job feed.
Be direct in your job titles and write them exactly as a job seeker would search for them. Stay away from terms like “Brand Ambassador” or “Coding Ninja,” as these will likely trigger spam filters. Also, refrain from using generic terms like shift 1, shift 2, and so forth because these will also be flagged.
Frequently posting the same job on Indeed to keep it high in search results is a major trigger for spam filters. Don’t try to cheat the system, as this will only guarantee that your job posting is excluded from the results altogether. This is important to note for evergreen positions that are always open such as nurses, gas station attendants, and so on. These jobs are generally not available for organic visibility and you should strongly consider sponsoring evergreen positions.
Another activity that gets immediately flagged as spam is “location blasting.” This is when employers post an identical job to multiple locations hoping to draw in more applicants. For example, posting the same call service representative job to 10 cities all within the state of Florida is location blasting. A general rule of thumb is that jobs should only be posted for locations where there is actually a physical presence. 
Insider Tip: vague locations such as “America” or “national” are likely to be flagged as spam also.
Commission only jobs are generally not available for organic visibility. As such, do not include “commission only” in the job title or the job description. All of your jobs should have either hourly or salary wages clearly defined in your job posting. 
Insider Tip: Internships can’t be posted as free. You must specify pay or credits earned. 
Everyone wants to hire the best people, but few have access to the best jobs sites—until now!
Paycor Recruiting can help you find the right candidates, faster. Our solution offers access to 25,000+ job boards, including Monster, Facebook, Talent.com, Adzuna, and more. Other key benefits include:
Contact our team today to learn more.
 Previous:
Next:
Stay up to date with the latest HR trends

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Employee satisfaction surveys are a great way to stay in tune with what your employees are thinking. Get real insights on how to engage and motivate your team.

        Article      
Read Time: 10 min
Employee burnout can impact work quality and morale. Discover the warning signs for burnout and how to prevent it in your workplace.

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Being an effective leader requires more than just technical knowledge. Create an environment where everyone can thrive and understand emotions in oneself and others.
HCM Software
HR + Payroll Software
Talent Management
Workforce Management
Employee Experience
Benefits Administration
Quick Links
Services + Support
855-565-3285
Talk to Sales
855-752-8564
© 2023 Paycor, Inc  |  Refer Paycor  |  Privacy Policy  |  1-800-501-9462 |
*Represents approximately 30,000 corporate clients covering 40,000 businesses employing people