6 Considerations For Employee Attendance Policies

Developing and enforcing attendance policies for your workforce can seem daunting. Use these 6 tips to help form the standards at your company.

Employee Experience
Last Updated:  December 24, 2019 | Read Time: 8 min
For any employee to excel, they need to understand their company’s expectations. Because every organization handles scheduling, lateness and lunch breaks a little differently, it can be daunting for employees to figure out exact expectations if they are not presented in a clear and concise manner.
For employers, developing and enforcing timekeeping policies can seem just as daunting, especially with the Department of Labor cracking down on wage and hour law violators. To protect your business from compliance missteps, here are six issues to consider when creating or updating your organization’s time policies:

Many employers choose not to reprimand employees for being a few minutes late here or there. But if an employee is consistently tardy and impacting productivity, you should discuss the issue with he or she and include a written warning in their personnel file.
Here are questions to consider about your policy:
Note: Many organizations grant workers an additional five to seven minutes to account for emergency situations. For instance, traffic can be extremely bad some mornings and city buses can be late. If this is something you believe is necessary, consider adding it into your timekeeping policy.

Some employees will undoubtedly try to skirt the rules, so recognizing potential issues with their arrival time in advance is key.
For years, businesses have used physical time clocks to record when an employee arrives and departs for the day. But with advancements in technology and strict enforcement, employers are utilizing alternative options to capture hours worked.
**Here are few examples:**
For industries with more remote employees, such as [healthcare](/healthcare-human-resources-software), customer service, sales, consultation and more, options such as mobile devices and computer logins are most prevalent.

Time theft occurs when an employee is paid for work they have not actually done. According to a recent study, time theft costs U.S. employers more than $400 billion per year in lost productivity.
Although it’s not always easy to detect, time theft comes in many forms and many levels of severity.
These include:
To help ensure your employees aren’t stealing time, consider these questions when developing a policy around time theft:
Many employers prefer planned [paid-time-off (PTO) policies](/resource-center/is-it-vacation-or-paid-time-off) because unplanned absences can disrupt schedules or leave employees scrambling to cover the work of a missing employee.
Ask yourself this:
From a policy prospective, these are great things to address but aren’t easy to track unless you’re using an automated solution. When your organization grows to a dozen or more employees, requests can become overwhelming. Meetings must be rescheduled, projects get pushed back and with a manual system at the helm, the workplace can become a lot less productive.

Executives and HR leaders identify labor costs as one of their toughest challenges, yet some organizations still fail to recognize overtime policies.
Ask yourself this:
Tracking hours by hand is a risky proposition. The Wage and Hour Division of the Department of Labor is cracking down on employers that fail to properly compensate employees who work more than 40 hours per week. See more on the DOL overtime rule here. The only way to stay on the right side of the law is to electronically capture hours worked and produce reports in case of an audit or employee lawsuit.

Flextime refers to the practice of employers giving their employees flexibility on when to start and complete their workday. More companies are allowing for greater flexibility for their employees. Some employees prefer starting their day before 7 a.m., whereas others have no problem working well into the night.
Recognizing that some people prefer flexibility and determining how your company should handle each request is a great step in empowering employees and building a positive company culture.
At the end of the day, policies are essential. But you need an easy way to keep track of hours worked, PTO, overtime, employee absences, and tardiness. Paycor Time is a flexible solution that allows employers to capture hours worked, create schedules, manage requests and stay on top of labor distribution.
Take a product tour today and see how our solutions can benefit your organization.
 Previous:
Next:
Stay up to date with the latest HR trends

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Employee satisfaction surveys are a great way to stay in tune with what your employees are thinking. Get real insights on how to engage and motivate your team.

        Article      
Read Time: 10 min
Employee burnout can impact work quality and morale. Discover the warning signs for burnout and how to prevent it in your workplace.

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Being an effective leader requires more than just technical knowledge. Create an environment where everyone can thrive and understand emotions in oneself and others.
HCM Software
HR + Payroll Software
Talent Management
Workforce Management
Employee Experience
Benefits Administration
Quick Links
Services + Support
855-565-3285
Talk to Sales
855-752-8564
© 2023 Paycor, Inc  |  Refer Paycor  |  Privacy Policy  |  1-800-501-9462 |
*Represents approximately 30,000 corporate clients covering 40,000 businesses employing people