Payroll Software with Direct Deposit

If you're looking for a payroll software make sure you consider one with direct deposit functionality. It's easier for both employees and organizations. Learn more here.

Workforce Management
Last Updated:  December 24, 2020 | Read Time: 6 min
Paying employees by direct deposit is win/win. It’s what employees prefer and expect: it’s how 93% of employees get paid, according to the 2019 “Getting Paid in America” Survey, saving them the time and hassle of having to personally cash or deposit every paycheck.
Direct deposit also allows organizations to become more efficient without compromising service or security, while eliminating paper checks from your payroll processing saves paper (win for the environment!).
If you’re considering a new automated payroll solution, it’s worth it to invest in one that can accommodate direct deposit services. But before you buy, review these frequently asked questions about the process.
Employers can require employees to use direct deposit, but it depends on your state’s laws. If one of your employee’s doesn’t have a bank account, you can still make a direct deposit through a pay card. In some states, receiving direct deposit can be a condition of employment. However, there are a couple constraints:

Maybe. Again, it depends on your state laws. Federal law doesn’t mandate pay stubs for workers, but the Fair Labor Standards Act does require employers keep accurate records of employees’ wages and hours worked. Employees have the right to request payroll records, even if issuing pay stubs isn’t required by your state.
Printed pay stubs are mandatory if you work in one of these 11 states:
Some states don’t require employers to provide pay stubs at all. You may have to request your wage information if you work in one of these 10 states:
Employees can opt out of an employer’s direct deposit program in the following states:
These states require their employers provide access to a pay stub, but don’t specify if it needs to be written/printed or if an electronic version will suffice:
If an employer decides not to offer printed pay stubs, they need to make sure:
The information found on a pay stub varies depending on what each state requires.
Time is money, and you don’t want to waste time (especially as a medium or small business owner) running payroll and managing payroll taxes. A payroll service can handle those tasks for you. It should also be able to help you produce pay stubs compliant with local regulations, wherever you are in the country.)
Cloud-based payroll software makes the information available anywhere and from any device. The direct deposit process should be seamless with a top-notch customer support team that’s a phone call away should any questions arise.
For more information on how Paycor can help with your payroll and direct deposit, contact our sales team.

 Previous:
Next:
Stay up to date with the latest HR trends

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Employee satisfaction surveys are a great way to stay in tune with what your employees are thinking. Get real insights on how to engage and motivate your team.

        Article      
Read Time: 10 min
Employee burnout can impact work quality and morale. Discover the warning signs for burnout and how to prevent it in your workplace.

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Being an effective leader requires more than just technical knowledge. Create an environment where everyone can thrive and understand emotions in oneself and others.
HCM Software
HR + Payroll Software
Talent Management
Workforce Management
Employee Experience
Benefits Administration
Quick Links
Services + Support
855-565-3285
Talk to Sales
855-752-8564
© 2023 Paycor, Inc  |  Refer Paycor  |  Privacy Policy  |  1-800-501-9462 |
*Represents approximately 30,000 corporate clients covering 40,000 businesses employing people