Unemployment Rates By State – Coronavirus

The US is seeing historic numbers of unemployment claims due to Coronavirus. Click here to view the number of claims and unemployment rates by state.

Workforce Management
Last Updated:  April 6, 2020 | Read Time: 8 min
As more COVID-19 regulations are passed and businesses temporarily close their doors, the U.S. is seeing historic weekly unemployment benefit claims across all 50 states. In fact, the previous two weeks have seen nearly 9 million unemployment claims. According to the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, roughly 5.6% of the U.S. civilian labor force has applied for unemployment benefits—as of March 28—which is higher than the peak unemployment of the Great Recession at 4.8%.
 
 
 
*U.S. Department of Labor; U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics; Tax Foundation calculations
Paycor is publishing expert advice, webinars, articles and templates for SMB leaders navigating the COVID-19 public health emergency on our Coronavirus Support Center.
Paycor is working diligently to provide SMB leaders with the information they need throughout this public health crisis. That’s why every two weeks we’ll update this article to give readers insights into unemployment numbers in their state and throughout the U.S. so they can make better business decisions.
 Previous:
Next:
Stay up to date with the latest HR trends

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Employee satisfaction surveys are a great way to stay in tune with what your employees are thinking. Get real insights on how to engage and motivate your team.

        Article      
Read Time: 10 min
Employee burnout can impact work quality and morale. Discover the warning signs for burnout and how to prevent it in your workplace.

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Being an effective leader requires more than just technical knowledge. Create an environment where everyone can thrive and understand emotions in oneself and others.
HCM Software
HR + Payroll Software
Talent Management
Workforce Management
Employee Experience
Benefits Administration
Quick Links
Services + Support
855-565-3285
Talk to Sales
855-752-8564
© 2023 Paycor, Inc  |  Refer Paycor  |  Privacy Policy  |  1-800-501-9462 |
*Represents approximately 30,000 corporate clients covering 40,000 businesses employing people