Clawback Clauses: Everything Your Business Needs To Know

Clawback clauses are a form of protection for employers when they issue a bonus to employees.  See how your company can use clawbacks when issuing incentives.

Benefits Administration
Last Updated: May 24, 2021 | Read Time: 7 min
What happens when an employee receives a bonus or an incentive payment and it’s later discovered they did not meet their performance requirements? Or what if an unscrupulous employee falsifies the numbers on his financial reports?
In order to protect themselves, many companies utilize something called a “clawback” clause.
A clawback clause is a provision within a business or employment contract that allows—under a prescribed set of circumstances—an organization to reclaim incentive or bonus funds previously paid to an employee. Clawback clauses provide a form of guarantee in situations where a business needs to respond to employee misconduct, poor job performance, low achievements or a general decline in revenue.
If an employee is offered a sign-on bonus upon starting employment, this may come with a clawback clause stating that the bonus must be returned in event of an early departure from the company. Clawback clauses attached to these and other bonuses can incentive high-performing employees to stick around longer.
Clawback provisions in contracts are usually designated as non-negotiable and often include some type of fee or penalty in addition to the amount paid back.
In addition to providing repayment of funds, clawback clauses also help companies—particularly in the financial industry—to proactively discourage employees from engaging in unethical practices such as reporting inaccurate revenues or other financial data. Many banks began utilizing clawback clauses after the 2008 economic crisis as a way to prevent future faults by their employees and to help rebuild public trust in financial institutions.
Prior to 2005, fewer than 3% of Fortune 100 companies used clawback clauses. But by 2010, that figure had risen to 82%. In 2015, the Securities and Exchange Commission issued a ruling that required companies to institute clawback provisions involving executive compensation packages, including stock options and other bonuses.
Many private sector industries and government agencies utilize clawback provisions as part of their standard business contracts. Examples include:



When introducing clawback clauses, here’s what HR professionals should keep in mind:






Clawback provisions are very important to the fiscal safety and reputation of your company, so it’s critical to familiarize with their details and how they can impact your employees. As an HR professional, you are the first line of communication and interaction with employees on these important issues and you must have a deep understanding of how and when a clawback clause is applied.




Paycor builds HR solutions for leaders. With Paycor, you can modernize every aspect of people management, from the way you recruit, onboard and develop your team, to the way you pay and retain them. See how Paycor can help the leaders of your organization solve the problems of today and tomorrow.





 Previous:
Next:
Stay up to date with the latest HR trends

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Employee satisfaction surveys are a great way to stay in tune with what your employees are thinking. Get real insights on how to engage and motivate your team.

        Article      
Read Time: 10 min
Employee burnout can impact work quality and morale. Discover the warning signs for burnout and how to prevent it in your workplace.

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Being an effective leader requires more than just technical knowledge. Create an environment where everyone can thrive and understand emotions in oneself and others.
HCM Software
HR + Payroll Software
Talent Management
Workforce Management
Employee Experience
Benefits Administration
Quick Links
Services + Support
855-565-3285
Talk to Sales
855-752-8564
© 2023 Paycor, Inc  |  Refer Paycor  |  Privacy Policy  |  1-800-501-9462 |
*Represents approximately 30,000 corporate clients covering 40,000 businesses employing people