Staff Performance Review Checklist For Great Employee Evaluations

With proper preparation, an employee performance review can go well and help the employee thrive. Managers can get a free checklist here to help the review process go smoothly.

Talent Management
Last Updated: May 19, 2021 | Read Time: 6 min
Neither managers nor employees like the annual performance review. One in five employees would rather call in sick than have one (TriNet & Wakefield). There’s a lot wrong with traditional performance reviews. It takes a whole new mindset to really do it right.
We can’t solve all the problems here, but we can start with a simple planning tool. The goal of the checklist is to help you remember all the moving parts that go into a review, as well as give you some practical tips on how to make a review go smoothly.
A performance review, when done right, can be a great tool for employee engagement and development. To get off to a good start, create reminders well in advance so it will not be a surprise for anyone. Additionally, even though you may have reviews automatically scheduled a year out (based on starting dates) schedule time before the date to gather feedback and documents related to your employee’s performance. If there is a rating scale, or a specific form of software, make sure your employee is clear on how to use it.
Avoid biases by including a mix of timely feedback, project results and a conversation about goals in every staff performance review. Take time to discuss specific learnings and offer constructive feedback. Here are a few other items to include:
After you have collected your supporting documents and enabled your staff to also prepare, it is important to select, whether virtual or in-person, a confidential space and time in which your employee can comfortably receive feedback (favorable or unfavorable). As you discuss the details of what’s happened, ensure you are also setting up action plans to address any concerns.
Use this time to also discuss your employee’s career aspirations and set appropriate objectives for future roles. Revise or set fresh objectives, if necessary. Lastly, some organizations require signatures for performance reviews. Consult the company policy to familiarize yourself with the specific requirements ahead of time so that you can close the loop.
If you would like to learn more about how to upgrade your performance management process, check out Paycor Talent Development. Paycor Talent Development moves beyond the annual performance review by allowing you to create a culture of continuous development.
Javascript is required to interact with this content.
 Previous:
Next:
Stay up to date with the latest HR trends
HCM Software
HR + Payroll Software
Talent Management
Workforce Management
Employee Experience
Benefits Administration
Quick Links
Services + Support
855-565-3285
Talk to Sales
855-752-8564
© 2023 Paycor, Inc  |  Refer Paycor  |  Privacy Policy  |  1-800-501-9462 |
*Represents approximately 30,000 corporate clients covering 40,000 businesses employing people