Coronavirus Work From Home Survey Template For Employers

Is remote work the new normal? It's important for employers to understand what their team wants. This survey can help!

Employee Experience
Last Updated: May 15, 2020 | Read Time: 6 min
The COVID-19 pandemic has enforced an unprecedented shift to remote work. Almost two-thirds of the American workforce were working from home by the end of April, according to Gallup data. As restrictions loosen, businesses are faced with a choice—go back to how things were before or experiment by keeping some elements of their business remote.
These decisions can’t just be made in the boardroom. It’s important to find out how employees feel about remote work and what they want companies to do to help them adapt faster. That’s why many businesses will be considering sending out an employee pulse survey.
Before sending out any WFH survey to employees, a business needs to be clear what options are available—much will depend on your industry and employees’ specific roles. Is a remote-first approach sustainable long-term or will telecommuting need to remain a rare occurrence for some/all employees?
You’ll also want to know what timescales you’re talking about. Many employees are naturally afraid of Coronavirus, and so are eager to continue telecommuting in the short-term. This doesn’t mean you’ll have employee buy-in for increased working from home in the longer-term.
Here’s a more detailed look at the pros and cons of moving to a remote-first workforce.
The primary drivers of a new remote work policy will be safety concerns and potential productivity—but that doesn’t mean that employee opinion isn’t important. Making big changes without employee support could lead to high employee disengagement. Even if you already have a good idea of your ideal set-up, asking employees for their opinion shows respect and allows employees to feel involved.
You may also be surprised by their opinion—depending on an employee’s role and personality, telecommuting can be anything from frustrating to liberating. Opinions will likely also depend on an employee’s childcare situation, home-office set-up and the length of their commute.
An employee pulse survey on work from home gives employers the opportunity to cover a range of topics. Think of it not just as a chance to gauge opinion but also an opportunity to discover ways you can increase productivity:
To save HR leaders time, we’ve prepared a template with sample questions to ask your employees. Download now and customize the text to your needs. You may want to use an online survey creator to send the questions to employees electronically.
Javascript is required to interact with this content.
 Previous:
Next:
Stay up to date with the latest HR trends
HCM Software
HR + Payroll Software
Talent Management
Workforce Management
Employee Experience
Benefits Administration
Quick Links
Services + Support
855-565-3285
Talk to Sales
855-752-8564
© 2023 Paycor, Inc  |  Refer Paycor  |  Privacy Policy  |  1-800-501-9462 |
*Represents approximately 30,000 corporate clients covering 40,000 businesses employing people