Performance Bias at Work: How it Affects Reviews

Fairness and objectivity must be maintained when conducting job evaluations and reviews. See which performance biases are most common and how to avoid them.

Employee Experience
Last Updated: January 4, 2023 | Read Time: 12 min
One of the most important things a manager can do is to complete a performance review for each of their employees. But when it comes to completing performance reviews, psychologists and researchers alike agree that managers naturally exhibit bias in their scores and ratings. This is often an unconscious action, but it still has consequences.
To be fair and objective, a performance evaluation must be based on the employee’s job-related behavior, not on their personal traits, gender, culture, work situation or other factors unrelated to the actual completion of job tasks.
Though subjectivity and partiality will never be completely removed from the performance review process, it’s important to keep some of our most common prejudices and biases in mind when completing performance reviews. This awareness will hopefully lead to consciously making adjustments to a more objective review score.
Performance biases occur when you make an assumption about an employee based solely on stereotypes. It’s important to recognize that these are not only necessarily cultural stereotypes but ones rooted in the workplace such as:
Performance bias generally occurs during performance appraisals. When discussing performance appraisals we’re not talking about a singular “thing” but a broader process that takes place over a number of days and includes:
Many organizations have a “this is how we’ve always done it” process to facilitate performance appraisals. Others use HCM systems.
The backbone of the performance appraisal process is the performance review. Employee performance reviews are an important tool which, when used correctly, can impact the growth of your employee and in turn, the company.
Annual performance reviews should be conducted against a strictly defined series of metrics that have been built around the expectations for a role.
One way, perhaps the easiest, to eliminate the proliferation of performance review biases is to shut down the performance appraisal process. But it would be unfair to employees, and the company, to stop holding performance appraisals strictly out of concern that there may be some form of bias used in their performance evaluation ratings. The more practical step would be to learn about some common biases and how to recognize them.
Knowing what type of language to avoid and what lenses to view a review through will help you to (hopefully) avoid any bias in performance reviews.
Below is a list of the 10 most frequent performance rating biases that occur during the performance appraisal process:
To understand why bias needs to be removed from the review process consider what’s at stake. Evaluations often direct:
When completed, biased reviews can either keep the right person from the right position or put the wrong person in the wrong position.
It’s a great idea to review these common biases with your management team prior to the commencement of performance appraisals, so your performance reviews are more accurate and objective in nature. When you can remove some of the bias from the evaluation process, performance appraisals become more meaningful for organizational decision-making and compensation adjustments. In addition, they become much more to the employee in assessing valid areas that need improvement.
You can, in some respects, “train” yourself to avoid biases in performance reviews. Some examples of what that could look like include:
Paycor HR allows your employees to add goals, track performance and interact with their managers from one point of contact. Easily track workflow processes online and receive alerts when an approval is needed, or a change has been made. Interested in learning more?
 Previous:
Next:
Stay up to date with the latest HR trends

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Employee satisfaction surveys are a great way to stay in tune with what your employees are thinking. Get real insights on how to engage and motivate your team.

        Article      
Read Time: 10 min
Employee burnout can impact work quality and morale. Discover the warning signs for burnout and how to prevent it in your workplace.

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Being an effective leader requires more than just technical knowledge. Create an environment where everyone can thrive and understand emotions in oneself and others.
HCM Software
HR + Payroll Software
Talent Management
Workforce Management
Employee Experience
Benefits Administration
Quick Links
Services + Support
855-565-3285
Talk to Sales
855-752-8564
© 2023 Paycor, Inc  |  Refer Paycor  |  Privacy Policy  |  1-800-501-9462 |
*Represents approximately 30,000 corporate clients covering 40,000 businesses employing people