Are Domestic Partnership Benefits Mandatory?

Employers have to follow regulations on domestic partnerships. Click here for info on the impact to domestic partner benefits in your state.

Benefits Administration
Last Updated: January 11, 2022 | Read Time: 12 min
The Supreme Court declared in 2013 that Section 3 of the Defense of Marriage Act, which denied the federal government’s recognition of same-sex marriages (even in states where it was legal), was unconstitutional. And with the Court’s landmark 2015 decision in Obergefell v. Hodges, same-sex marriage became legal nationwide.
The IRS stepped in and declared that two people are legally married under federal law when they are also legally married under their state’s law. Because of this declaration, the IRS treats same-sex and opposite-sex marriages the same under federal tax law, and same-sex couples are also eligible for Social Security spousal benefits. However, domestic partnerships and civil unions, regardless of state, aren’t considered marriages.
Providing pre-tax benefits to employees is an important component of the attraction and retention programs of many companies. But under federal law, an employer can provide pre-tax health insurance benefits only to spouses or dependents, not domestic partners.
Here’s a quick snapshot of the U.S. detailing which states have laws around domestic partner benefits and domestic partnership registration. For a deeper dive into a specific state, check out the chart below.
To help organizations stay informed—and compliant—we’ll keep these resources updated in line with any new legislation at federal, state or local level.

If a company’s health insurance plan permits employees’ unmarried partners to be covered, the employer can provide health insurance benefits on a post-tax basis, meaning the fair market value of their partner’s insurance coverage is considered part of the employee’s income. If an employer pays for any part of a domestic partner’s health insurance, that employee benefit is taxable and must be reported on the employee’s W-2 as imputed income.
It’s possible for employer-paid insurance coverage to be tax-free. On the federal level, an exception is made if the domestic partner meets these three qualifications. They must:
The government recommends that an employee include their unmarried domestic partner in a family plan only if they have a child together or if they’ll claim the domestic partner as a tax dependent.
Since same-sex marriage became legal, a growing number of companies have eliminated their health insurance coverage for domestic partners. Their justification is that there’s no need to continue offering the coverage now that same-sex partners can legally get hitched and become same-sex spouses.
It’s important to note that companies are not required by federal law to provide domestic partner benefits even if they offer coverage to married couples, but some states and municipalities do mandate coverage to unmarried couples. In most cases, employees must prove domestic partnership to gain eligibility via registration with their local domestic partnership registry, an affidavit certifying the relationship, or other documentation.
Paycor is not a legal, tax, benefit, accounting or investment advisor. All communication from Paycor should be confirmed by your company’s legal, tax, benefit, accounting or investment advisor before making any decisions.
To register a domestic partnership in a state, city or county that recognizes it, you must fill out an application from your city or county clerk’s office. Both partners are required to appear in person and show proof of identity and residence. You will pay a registration fee and sign an affidavit in front of the clerk or a notary public. 
If you’re not out in the workplace and are fearful of discrimination or harassment, it’s important to determine if your company has a policy to prevent disclosure to managers and co-workers. 
If your company’s health insurance plan permits employees’ unmarried partners to be covered, they will provide health insurance benefits on a post-tax basis. The fair market value of your partner’s insurance coverage will be considered part of your income. If your employer pays for any part of your partner’s health insurance, that is taxable and will be reported on your W-2 as imputed income.
Service members and veterans are covered under federal law as domestic partners or same-sex spouses. 
When it comes to trusted HR expertise, turn to Paycor for help. Paycor’s HR Support Center is a comprehensive HR resource that provides organizations access to employee handbook templates, sample job descriptions, useful checklists, law alerts and more. Plus, dedicated support from an HR expert is always available with HR Support Center On-Demand.

 Previous:
Next:
Stay up to date with the latest HR trends

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Employee satisfaction surveys are a great way to stay in tune with what your employees are thinking. Get real insights on how to engage and motivate your team.

        Article      
Read Time: 10 min
Employee burnout can impact work quality and morale. Discover the warning signs for burnout and how to prevent it in your workplace.

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Being an effective leader requires more than just technical knowledge. Create an environment where everyone can thrive and understand emotions in oneself and others.
HCM Software
HR + Payroll Software
Talent Management
Workforce Management
Employee Experience
Benefits Administration
Quick Links
Services + Support
855-565-3285
Talk to Sales
855-752-8564
© 2023 Paycor, Inc  |  Refer Paycor  |  Privacy Policy  |  1-800-501-9462 |
*Represents approximately 30,000 corporate clients covering 40,000 businesses employing people