How to Benefit from WOTC (Work Opportunity Tax Credit)

Discover who qualifies for WOTC, how to apply for credits and what you need to do to potentially save thousands at tax time.

Workforce Management
Last Updated: October 14, 2022 | Read Time: 7 min
Hiring tax credits can have a dramatic impact on a company’s tax liability. For example, by using the Work Opportunity Tax Credit, or WOTC, a company could receive up to $9,600 in federal tax credits for certain employees who are hired. If your organization could benefit from tax savings, this article is for you. Discover who qualifies, how to apply for those credits and what you need to do now to potentially save thousands at tax time.
The WOTC is a business tax incentive that allows companies to receive tax credits for hiring individuals who are part of targeted groups that have consistently faced significant barriers to employment.
Here are the top five WOTC-issuing states:
WOTC was created to help employees from certain groups move from economic dependency on various types of government assistance into self-support. The goal is for these candidates to progress into earning a steady income and contributing taxpayers. At the same time, participating employers would be able to reduce their income tax liability.
Eligibility for a WOTC is based on an employer’s hiring from specific groups that often face significant obstacles to employment. The amount of credit an employer can claim varies and depends upon which target groups are hired, the wages paid to those individuals in the first year of employment and the number of hours the employees worked.
If an employer hires an eligible employee from a target group, a federal tax credit will be available at the end of the year. The credit amount will be based on the number of hours the employee works and the total wages earned during the first year of employment.
To claim a WOTC for an employee in the Temporary Assistance for Needy Families (TANF) target group, a different set of metrics are used. For these employees, an employer must have a member of this group working for up to 24 consecutive months.
Note: Many other programs for hiring tax credits exist at the state and local level. These programs will require redundant information on each potentially eligible employee.
The WOTC is a federal tax credit and as such is limited by a company’s income tax liability, or the amount of Social Security taxes owed. The credit can be claimed as part of your annual tax-filing process by using Form 5884 and/or Form 3800.
Before the credit can be claimed though, an employer must obtain a Pre-Screening Notice. Also known as IRS Form 8850, this is used to ensure that the employee is in fact a member of one of the WOTC targeted groups.
The WOTC program can provide a great benefit to businesses. It can also be overwhelming. Fortunately, there’s help.
Paycor and HIREtech have established an automated payroll feed that makes implementing a tax credit solution simple. Paycor can send all the information necessary to start claiming credits directly to HIREtech and the HIREtech software platform can easily integrate into most state tax programs in conjunction with your WOTC screening to maximize your tax credits.
Get in touch today to see how we can help you manage WOTC for your workplace.
 Previous:
Next:
Stay up to date with the latest HR trends

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Employee satisfaction surveys are a great way to stay in tune with what your employees are thinking. Get real insights on how to engage and motivate your team.

        Article      
Read Time: 10 min
Employee burnout can impact work quality and morale. Discover the warning signs for burnout and how to prevent it in your workplace.

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Being an effective leader requires more than just technical knowledge. Create an environment where everyone can thrive and understand emotions in oneself and others.
HCM Software
HR + Payroll Software
Talent Management
Workforce Management
Employee Experience
Benefits Administration
Quick Links
Services + Support
855-565-3285
Talk to Sales
855-752-8564
© 2023 Paycor, Inc  |  Refer Paycor  |  Privacy Policy  |  1-800-501-9462 |
*Represents approximately 30,000 corporate clients covering 40,000 businesses employing people