Short-Term Disability Benefit Laws by State

Some states have regulations on short term disability insurance for employees. See the states with legislation here.

Benefits Administration
Last Updated: July 15, 2020 | Read Time: 7 min
When unable to work due to an unexpected illness or injury, employees rely on insurance to cover at least part of their usual salaries. If this injury or illness is job-related, they can claim Workers’ Compensation. However, non-job-related absences require Short-Term Disability (STD) insurance or Temporary Disability Insurance (TDI) plans.
Many companies offer short term disability insurance as part of their benefits packages, but several states (and Puerto Rico) have legislation making it mandatory. Though these laws vary as to how the insurance is funded and which employees are covered, in all cases it is only possible to receive the benefit after a 7-day waiting or eligibility period during which time employees will have to rely on any paid sick leave they have accrued.
The exact definition of a qualifying short-term disability differs between states, but typically includes disabling injuries, prolonged sickness and pregnancy. Various exclusions apply for self-inflicted injuries or those acquired during illegal acts or acts of war.
Unlike long-term disability benefit, it is usually required only that an employee cannot carry out their job, rather than any job. However, in New York and Puerto Rico the benefit is dependent upon employees being unable to carry out any work for which their training and experience makes them reasonably qualified.
Paycor offers the technology and expertise that HR leaders need to manage their people, stay compliant and make better business decisions. To learn how to craft the perfect benefits package for your company, get our Benefits Playbook.
 Previous:
Next:
Stay up to date with the latest HR trends

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Employee satisfaction surveys are a great way to stay in tune with what your employees are thinking. Get real insights on how to engage and motivate your team.

        Article      
Read Time: 10 min
Employee burnout can impact work quality and morale. Discover the warning signs for burnout and how to prevent it in your workplace.

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Being an effective leader requires more than just technical knowledge. Create an environment where everyone can thrive and understand emotions in oneself and others.
HCM Software
HR + Payroll Software
Talent Management
Workforce Management
Employee Experience
Benefits Administration
Quick Links
Services + Support
855-565-3285
Talk to Sales
855-752-8564
© 2023 Paycor, Inc  |  Refer Paycor  |  Privacy Policy  |  1-800-501-9462 |
*Represents approximately 30,000 corporate clients covering 40,000 businesses employing people