Why Your Business Needs a Talent Management System

Finding the right employees is one of the most important jobs for HR teams. Learn how a talent management system can help find, train, and develop workers.

Talent Management
Last Updated: August 18, 2021 | Read Time: 6 min
The process of finding the right people is one of the most important things you’ll do as an HR leader, but making it easy for them to thrive in your environment is critical to ensure business growth over the long term. In fact, 86% of professionals said that they would change jobs if they were offered more opportunities for professional development (Execu|Search Hiring Outlook). This is why many businesses are embracing talent management. 
Conceptually, talent management is a way to balance the strengths of your people against the needs of the business. Incorporating talent management into your culture can also help you integrate your organization’s values into your employees’ career path, from hire to promotion. But, doing talent management the old-fashioned way will quickly drain time, waste resources and put you behind the competition. 
For example: 
Employees are essential to your company’s success or failure. Technology now makes managing your talent efficient, in many cases automating tasks and saving time. With a competitive labor market, you need a contemporary approach to talent management that gives you the agility to move at the speed the market demands. Read on to learn more about talent management systems and why having one can propel ongoing growth for your people – and your business. 
A talent management system simplifies the work you do to hire, retain and grow your employees. Using technology, you can track and analyze compensation, performance, goals or OKRs and training for each employee. Here are some examples:
From the HR department’s perspective, a talent management system frees leaders to look at the bigger picture, helping drive strategy instead of managing tasks. The data captured by the software can help you do a better job recruiting and reduce employee turnover. Your team is freed from administrative tasks and paper-based record-keeping, allowing them to make bigger contributions to the organization. You also can use the data from talent management systems to make better decisions around recruiting, promotions and training programs. 
Think of the investment in talent management from your employee’s (or future employee’s) perspective — having an accessible system for ongoing growth, development and training tells that future employee they will have the chance to grow while working at your company. This can be a powerful differentiator when recruiting top talent. Having a talent management system also means your employees will have easy access to their compensation, performance reviews, goals and training. Having this information in one place makes it more efficient and empowers employees as they move along their career path. 
Managers and line-level employees will need to interact with the system regularly, get buy-in across the company before making a decision. It’s also important to find what level of support your vendor offers and consider a trial period before implementing the solution 
Regardless of the size of your company or your specific needs, there’s a talent management solution that will help you streamline your work and help you attract and retain the best talent in your industry. If you’d like to get more information about how to select the talent management system that’s right for you, check out our Talent Management Buyer’s Guide.
 Previous:
Next:
Stay up to date with the latest HR trends

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Employee satisfaction surveys are a great way to stay in tune with what your employees are thinking. Get real insights on how to engage and motivate your team.

        Article      
Read Time: 10 min
Employee burnout can impact work quality and morale. Discover the warning signs for burnout and how to prevent it in your workplace.

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Being an effective leader requires more than just technical knowledge. Create an environment where everyone can thrive and understand emotions in oneself and others.
HCM Software
HR + Payroll Software
Talent Management
Workforce Management
Employee Experience
Benefits Administration
Quick Links
Services + Support
855-565-3285
Talk to Sales
855-752-8564
© 2023 Paycor, Inc  |  Refer Paycor  |  Privacy Policy  |  1-800-501-9462 |
*Represents approximately 30,000 corporate clients covering 40,000 businesses employing people