The 5 Main Roles in HR

Several disciplines make up the HR department. View the roles of HR, and how their work impacts the daily operations of a business.

Workforce Management
Last Updated: June 27, 2022 | Read Time: 7 min
An effective human resources (HR) management department can help provide organizational structure and the ability to meet business needs by managing your business’s most valuable asset – your employees. 
Several disciplines make up the HR department, and human resources managers working at smaller companies might perform more than one of the five main duties: talent management, compensation and benefits for employees, training and development, compliance, and workplace safety.
Recruiters are the heavy lifters in building any company’s workforce. They’re responsible for the total hiring process including posting positions on job boards, sourcing candidates through job fairs and social media, serving as the first-line contacts for running background checks to screen candidates, conducting the initial interviews, and coordinating with the hiring manager responsible for making the final selection. A recruiter’s success is determined by several key metrics: the number of positions they fill each year, where candidates are coming from (e.g., job postings, social media, career fairs, etc.), the time it takes to fill positions, and reasons why an applicant wasn’t hired. (NOTE: If you’re having trouble attracting talent to your company, it’s time to evaluate why. Take our recruiting quiz to see how you measure up.)Employee relations or support is the area of the talent management team that is concerned with strengthening the employer-employee relationship. Human resources managers in this role study job satisfaction, employee engagement, organizational culture, and resolving workplace conflict. Gallup estimates that disengaged employees cost U.S. businesses a whopping $600+ billion each year in lost productivity, so this role is integral to the success of your business.If the company has a unionized workforce, this team will also work on labor relations, including negotiating collective bargaining agreements, creating managerial responses to union organizing campaigns, and interpreting labor union contract questions.The talent management group is also home to HR practitioners who focus on workforce planning and management. This area includes succession planning and retention efforts across the business, from the C-suite on down. When an employee resigns, retires, is fired or laid off, gets sick, or dies, the workforce planning team kicks into action.
As you can see, there can be a lot of cross-over among the five main areas of the HR department and it can be tough to cover all of those moving parts. But the success of your business depends on full HR coverage. If it’s too much of a burden to go it alone, Paycor can help. Whatever your HR and benefits challenges are, we can help you solve them with technology that works for your business. Take a tour of our products today and see for yourself how Paycor can help.
 Previous:
Next:
Stay up to date with the latest HR trends

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Employee satisfaction surveys are a great way to stay in tune with what your employees are thinking. Get real insights on how to engage and motivate your team.

        Article      
Read Time: 10 min
Employee burnout can impact work quality and morale. Discover the warning signs for burnout and how to prevent it in your workplace.

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Being an effective leader requires more than just technical knowledge. Create an environment where everyone can thrive and understand emotions in oneself and others.
HCM Software
HR + Payroll Software
Talent Management
Workforce Management
Employee Experience
Benefits Administration
Quick Links
Services + Support
855-565-3285
Talk to Sales
855-752-8564
© 2023 Paycor, Inc  |  Refer Paycor  |  Privacy Policy  |  1-800-501-9462 |
*Represents approximately 30,000 corporate clients covering 40,000 businesses employing people