What is Performance Management? | Paycor

Performance management should be inspiring for employees, not something that invokes fear. Get best practices for your workforce, here.

Talent Management
Last Updated: April 15, 2021 | Read Time: 7 min
Performance management has a bad reputation. For 74% of employees, performance reviews come once a year or less, and only 14% strongly agree these reviews inspire them to improve (Gallup). It’s no surprise 87% of HR leaders are considering changing how they review performance (Gartner).
Rather than something employees fear, performance management should be about inspiring your whole team to achieve their potential and produce results. Continuous development requires an ongoing conversation about performance, rather than infrequent and ineffective evaluations.
Traditionally, performance management has been about looking back at an employee’s work over the previous year. Employees who haven’t met expectations might be placed on a performance improvement plan. If your only goal is to evaluate output, this way works. But if you actually plan to develop your talent, a year is a very long time.
Not all goals work on a 365-day cycle. When goal-setting isn’t linked to short-term results, you end up with unstructured aims which prove impossible to evaluate. Annual reviews also fall foul of recency bias, so an employee’s work in the first 9 months of the year may end up forgotten.
Whether you’re dealing with superstar talent or a low-performer, finding ways for them to unlock their full potential should be a day-by-day process. What’s more, communication can’t be one-way. Managers need to work with their teams to set goals, and understand each individual’s challenges. The modern manager is as much of a coach as a disciplinarian.
This is especially true considering younger generations are more likely to be on the lookout for new job opportunities. If employees don’t feel they are developing, there’s a higher chance they’ll jump ship. If you want to keep your team engaged and producing results, you need to care about talent development.
When you give performance management the attention it deserves, you’ll be able to make the most of your investments into recruiting, onboarding and training. You’ll also be better placed to make the right decisions when it comes to succession planning and compensation strategy.
To give your team the best chance of reaching their potential, incorporate these performance management best practices:
So, to recap, you want to create a culture of continuous feedback, with measurable goals incorporating real-time data. Doesn’t sound easy, does it? The good news is, performance management software can help. Paycor’s Talent Development makes this possible with:
Our Human Capital Management (HCM) platform modernizes every aspect of people management, from the way you recruit, onboard and develop people, to the way you pay and retain them. But what really sets us apart is our focus on business leaders. For 30 years, we’ve been listening to and partnering with leaders, so we know what they need: HR technology that saves time, powerful analytics that provide actionable insights and dedicated support from HR experts. That’s why more than 40,000 businesses trust Paycor to help them solve problems and achieve their goals.
 Previous:
Next:
Stay up to date with the latest HR trends

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Employee satisfaction surveys are a great way to stay in tune with what your employees are thinking. Get real insights on how to engage and motivate your team.

        Article      
Read Time: 10 min
Employee burnout can impact work quality and morale. Discover the warning signs for burnout and how to prevent it in your workplace.

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Being an effective leader requires more than just technical knowledge. Create an environment where everyone can thrive and understand emotions in oneself and others.
HCM Software
HR + Payroll Software
Talent Management
Workforce Management
Employee Experience
Benefits Administration
Quick Links
Services + Support
855-565-3285
Talk to Sales
855-752-8564
© 2023 Paycor, Inc  |  Refer Paycor  |  Privacy Policy  |  1-800-501-9462 |
*Represents approximately 30,000 corporate clients covering 40,000 businesses employing people