Offboarding Employee Checklist & Offboarding Process

Properly offboarding employees is just as important as onboarding them. Get a free checklist here to ensure your organization has a solid offboarding process in place

HR + Payroll Software
Last Updated: February 8, 2023 | Read Time: 14 min
People leave companies for a variety of reasons. For those who leave voluntarily, a smooth employee offboarding process is just as important as a solid employee onboarding process. While the term “offboarding” might not be heard as frequently, your offboarding process is a vital component to your company’s growth and success. As such it needs to be defined and consistently applied across every employee when they leave the company.
Keep reading to see how you can implement an employee offboarding process or improve your existing offboarding program.
The offboarding process is really one of transition and security. You’re transitioning one employee out of their role and another into that position. A successful transition is where the security component comes in. You’re securing all of the materials that the outgoing employee had access to, you’re securing their final experience with the company  as a positive one and you’re securing the success of the company by making sure there are no gaps regarding customer relationships or internal responsibilities.
This all can be managed through a structured offboarding plan.
A well-documented employee offboarding process can help ensure compliance with various employment laws, protect your material goods (by collecting the company-issued laptop, building keys and any other company asset) and gathering the knowledge around client relationships and institutional processes that could cause business harm if they were “lost.”
Additionally, when your rock star employees depart on good terms, having a positive offboarding experience can help turn them into so-called “Boomerang Employees” who come back to the company in the future. In fact, a recent study found that 15% of employees have returned to a company they once worked for.
Additionally, a good offboarding program can help with attracting top talent when your superstars recommend the company to their networks because they had an overall high-quality work experience from start to finish.
Some companies have a two-tiered offboarding process. Higher level, or more customer-facing, employees may undergo a more detailed offboarding process while others may take part in a much more limited one.
This only shows that a company doesn’t completely understand the value that current employees present to the organization. While an employee may not be “The Face” of the company, they still have a vital role to play in its success and that role should be explored and captured before they are gone.
An offboarding process is about more than just making sure you get the keys back and you know where to send an employee’s final paycheck. It’s about cultivating success in three key business-centric areas.
There are three categories of offboarding tasks that need to be managed for every employee.
You can argue that this is the most important offboarding task. When you’re losing an employee, there is a dangerous possibility of losing a lot of knowledge too. Process information, customer relationship details, project background—it’s all there getting ready to walk out the door. Having a formal plan in place helps the company hold on to that key business detail.
These forms are often used so that confidential company information—such as proprietary software and processes or customer lists—is retained within the company and not shared with your competition. If your employee signed a non-compete, non-disclosure, non-poaching or confidentiality agreement when they were hired, review the terms and conditions of the agreements with them before they leave. Be sure to address any penalties that will apply if an agreement is breached.
Exit interviews are a very important part of the offboarding process. They provide important insight into your business culture, processes, ethics and employee morale. By giving departing employees the opportunity to discuss their observations and reasons for leaving, HR can monitor these responses and determine trends and patterns over time. For example, if you have an employee retention problem in certain departments, maybe it’s time to take a look at the manager.
If the working relationship wasn’t the best, an employee’s manager can often be a source of conflict. It’s usually best to have someone not close to the situation, such as an HR manager perform the exit interview to make the employee feel more at ease.
The two biggest mistakes a company can make when offboarding an employee are:
Ignoring it happens when you accept the resignation but then let business continue as normal until a few days before their last time in the office. At this point you’re trying to rush a process, hoping that current employees who should connect regarding a transition still can.
The other issue is when you leave it all with the outgoing employee. Yes they have some responsibility in the transition but they’ve already got one foot out the door. Even if they were a strong employee they are probably more concerned with onboarding at their new employer than offboarding at their current one.
These mistakes can cause drops in the information transfer, leave material items uncollected, and lead to bumps in customer relationships. Plus it’s going to give the departing employee a poor last impression of the company. And as you know, negative reviews travel fast.
Automating your offboarding program can help ensure you don’t miss critical steps in closing out your working relationship. To learn more, talk to a Paycor representative.
 Previous:
Next:
Stay up to date with the latest HR trends

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Employee satisfaction surveys are a great way to stay in tune with what your employees are thinking. Get real insights on how to engage and motivate your team.

        Article      
Read Time: 10 min
Employee burnout can impact work quality and morale. Discover the warning signs for burnout and how to prevent it in your workplace.

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Being an effective leader requires more than just technical knowledge. Create an environment where everyone can thrive and understand emotions in oneself and others.
HCM Software
HR + Payroll Software
Talent Management
Workforce Management
Employee Experience
Benefits Administration
Quick Links
Services + Support
855-565-3285
Talk to Sales
855-752-8564
© 2023 Paycor, Inc  |  Refer Paycor  |  Privacy Policy  |  1-800-501-9462 |
*Represents approximately 30,000 corporate clients covering 40,000 businesses employing people