Employee Rewards Are Not One-Size Fits All

Showing your employees they're appreciated can have a big impact on their engagement in the workplace. Discover the keys to successfully rewarding your team!

Employee Experience
Last Updated:  March 12, 2018 | Read Time: 5 min
Showing team members that they are valued doesn’t have to be complicated or expensive, but praise and thank yous can have an enormously positive impact on your employees’ engagement. It’s important, however, to figure out what motivates your employees before doling out the kudos. Even though it’s an easy go-to, not everyone on your team is motivated by receiving company-branded schwag. If you really want to personalize your rewards program, consider encouraging employees to create a “Favorite Things” spreadsheet or shared Google doc where they can add items they like so recognition can be customized. To understand the best ways to reward employees, ask questions such as:
The key to successful employee rewards is being creative, thoughtful and attuned to their preferences and personalities. Here, we’ve taken a look at some common (and not so common) methods of reward and categorized them by personality type.


Both of the personality types at your company need to feel that their work is meaningful to create a culture of motivation and engagement. They want to see that what they do is part of the big picture. Providing rewards and incentive for positive behavior that’s tied to the business’ mission helps employees understand the impact their work has toward the goals of the company. Check out more resources for your human resources team and create passion amongst your employees.
 Previous:
Next:
Stay up to date with the latest HR trends

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Employee satisfaction surveys are a great way to stay in tune with what your employees are thinking. Get real insights on how to engage and motivate your team.

        Article      
Read Time: 10 min
Employee burnout can impact work quality and morale. Discover the warning signs for burnout and how to prevent it in your workplace.

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Being an effective leader requires more than just technical knowledge. Create an environment where everyone can thrive and understand emotions in oneself and others.
HCM Software
HR + Payroll Software
Talent Management
Workforce Management
Employee Experience
Benefits Administration
Quick Links
Services + Support
855-565-3285
Talk to Sales
855-752-8564
© 2023 Paycor, Inc  |  Refer Paycor  |  Privacy Policy  |  1-800-501-9462 |
*Represents approximately 30,000 corporate clients covering 40,000 businesses employing people