3 Key Traits of a Successful Recruiter

Are you targeting the right recruiting candidates? Here are the three most important traits to look for in a successful recruiter.

Talent Management
Last Updated:  March 25, 2020 | Read Time: 5 min
A bad hire can be costly, but the costs of hiring a bad recruiter can be catastrophic. The ripple effect of one bad hire can send waves of consequences throughout your organization that leads to significant losses in money, employee morale, and organizational productivity. When that one bad hire happens to be the person who will be making your hiring decisions going forward, the direct and indirect costs of this ripple effect are compounded exponentially.
When considering the gravity of these consequences, the task of hiring a recruiter can be daunting. However, remember that with great risk, comes great reward. Just as detrimental as a bad recruiter can be, a great recruiter can be the difference maker, serving as a “catalyst” for an organization’s success.
So how do you wade through the vast sea of recruiters to recruit a “catalyst recruiter?” The first thing that you must consider is that recruiters know this game better than anyone else. They have spent their careers training and coaching others on how to interview well, and through this experience, they know all of the tricks of the trade. Any recruiter will be able to leverage their strengths and mask their weaknesses in a way to appear qualified for a given job. For this reason, when interviewing for a recruiter, you have to double down and be prepared to carry out an in-depth assessment. Below, we cover one aspect of this assessment process, providing an overview of the three traits that you must ensure that your recruiting candidates possess.
Another reason every recruiter needs laser focus is that they often get pulled in a million directions at once. Hiring managers from every department will be tugging at a recruiter’s arm, trying to get them to find the perfect candidate for a multitude of different roles. It takes strong focus to prioritize these needs and fulfill them accordingly.
The last reason that every recruiter needs to possess advanced focus capabilities, is that many corporate recruiting roles lack a traditional form of leadership. This is especially true for SMBs, where recruiters operate as their own department, or as a distant branch of HR. Under such circumstances, it is essential that recruiters have the focus to stay the course and keep the end goal in sight.
Finding, interviewing and hiring talented people are the most important challenges growing businesses face. Paycor Recruiting is a software solution designed and built by recruiters for recruiters and HR hiring teams to help you solve your hiring problems and optimize your recruiting process.

 Previous:
Next:
Stay up to date with the latest HR trends

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Employee satisfaction surveys are a great way to stay in tune with what your employees are thinking. Get real insights on how to engage and motivate your team.

        Article      
Read Time: 10 min
Employee burnout can impact work quality and morale. Discover the warning signs for burnout and how to prevent it in your workplace.

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Being an effective leader requires more than just technical knowledge. Create an environment where everyone can thrive and understand emotions in oneself and others.
HCM Software
HR + Payroll Software
Talent Management
Workforce Management
Employee Experience
Benefits Administration
Quick Links
Services + Support
855-565-3285
Talk to Sales
855-752-8564
© 2023 Paycor, Inc  |  Refer Paycor  |  Privacy Policy  |  1-800-501-9462 |
*Represents approximately 30,000 corporate clients covering 40,000 businesses employing people