10 Must Haves for HR SaaS

HR teams need sophisticated solutions to manage workflows. Before you make any decisions on a cloud based HR system, read this list of must-haves.

Employee Experience
Last Updated:  July 10, 2019 | Read Time: 7 min
Software as a Service (SaaS) is the term used for software that’s delivered and used entirely online or in the cloud, meaning that no software is actually installed on employees’ hard drives.
More and more businesses are turning to cloud-based solutions to manage their workflows, run accounting and control their supply chains, often as part of a larger enterprise resources planning (ERP) solution. Probably not surprisingly to most, the HR function is no exception. A SaaS human resources solution can enable small and midsize business owners to control every aspect of their employee management tasks online. And in doing so, HR departments can eliminate mundane and error-prone manual tasks such as wrangling multiple spreadsheets and managing physical time cards, while also preventing paper personnel records from bursting out of overloaded filing cabinets.
The best HR SaaS solutions provide unified tools and solutions that help you oversee all HR activities. Core HR tasks previously handled by practitioners, such as employee verifications, application processing and benefits administration can now be effectively delivered via self-service in a cloud computing environment. Top-tier human resource management systems (HRMS) are customizable and give HR plenty of options for making design or function changes, such as adding company branding and configurable fields, without the big price tag typically found in custom systems sold by software vendors.
By automating HR processes, you can take the tactical burden off your shoulders. And because SaaS HR applications are also scalable, you can quickly and easily implement new features as your business changes or grows. For example, as your company hires additional employees, you may find the need to add a learning management system to keep team members up-to-date on trainings without involving the presence of HR.




So, what components make up a great SaaS HR system? We’re glad you asked! Check out this handy list of tools your system should offer.
As you conduct your research and build a case for implementing a new SaaS HR solution, using this list can help you illustrate to your leadership team how the right technology and expertise can make a huge difference in productivity, cost, and employee engagement.
Need help determining which HR SaaS products will help your organization grow and remain compliant? Check out Paycor’s Solution Finder.

 Previous:
Next:
Stay up to date with the latest HR trends

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Employee satisfaction surveys are a great way to stay in tune with what your employees are thinking. Get real insights on how to engage and motivate your team.

        Article      
Read Time: 10 min
Employee burnout can impact work quality and morale. Discover the warning signs for burnout and how to prevent it in your workplace.

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Being an effective leader requires more than just technical knowledge. Create an environment where everyone can thrive and understand emotions in oneself and others.
HCM Software
HR + Payroll Software
Talent Management
Workforce Management
Employee Experience
Benefits Administration
Quick Links
Services + Support
855-565-3285
Talk to Sales
855-752-8564
© 2023 Paycor, Inc  |  Refer Paycor  |  Privacy Policy  |  1-800-501-9462 |
*Represents approximately 30,000 corporate clients covering 40,000 businesses employing people