Mobile Payroll App Pros and Cons

Mobile apps are the logical evolution of payroll. See the pros and cons and see if the apps are good for your company.

Employee Experience
Last Updated:  January 7, 2020 | Read Time: 4 min
Mobile applications, also called mobile apps or just apps, are computer programs that are designed to run on mobile devices such as iPhones, Android devices, tablets or smart watches. Apps are typically downloaded from distribution platforms such as Apple’s App Store or Google Play Store for Android devices. They were originally pretty basic tools mainly created to assist with productivity such as email and calendar apps, but the functionality became highly popular. Now literally millions of apps are available, including apps for mobile payroll.
The first basic payroll self-service app came out in 2010. Over the past decade, and with advances in technology, employees can now access far more than just their pay stubs with a tap of the screen.
Providing a mobile payroll app offers additional benefits other than convenience to both employees and the payroll department, including:
Increased Workplace EfficiencyGreatly reducing the necessity for managers to have their hands on a lot of unproductive administrative tasks frees up their time to actually work on what they were hired to do. And when payroll staff can run payroll anytime, anywhere, they can focus more of their attention on big picture undertakings such as workforce planning.
A mobile payroll app can help companies that want to improve their carbon footprint and the environment by eliminating the need for paper paychecks, enabling them to cut thousands of budget dollars spent on paper and printing costs every year.
When employees have access to their personal information when and where they need it, they appreciate the efficiency this affords them. For example, say an employee is car shopping on a Saturday. Back in the day, when the car salesperson asked for paystub verification to get the loan paperwork started, the employee would typically have to wait until Monday to call HR and get that information, delaying their purchase. By having a mobile payroll app, now all they have to do is whip out their smartphone, access the app and navigate to the paystub section to show the salesperson for verification.
As we discussed, a payroll app has many benefits, but some people are still unconvinced. Not surprisingly, the primary concern with mobile payroll apps is their security.
While worry over potential security issues should never be discounted of course, the truth is that the use of an app on a mobile device carries the same level of risk as using a self-service dashboard from a desktop or laptop computer. Data isn’t stored on individual devices and it’s encrypted and routed through secure servers.
Another aspect of mobile HR solutions that’s been criticized is that the functionality isn’t any different from what’s on the desktop computer. While that’s true in most cases, should that really be a big concern? As we said in the benefits section, the most appealing part of having an app is its portability and anytime access. If an employee needs to quickly access their schedule, they don’t have to wait until they’re back at a computer; they can do it that second.
So, while some companies may be uncertain about deploying a mobile payroll apps, the concerns are mostly unfounded.
Apps are now being used for many functions that come with running a business. Payroll and HR are no exception. Today’s mobile payroll apps can offer ease of use, unmatched convenience, and can boost both employee engagement and overall company efficiency and productivity.
Interested in seeing if a mobile payroll app is right for your business? Let’s talk. We can help you see how the right technology combined with our expertise can help.
 Previous:
Next:
Stay up to date with the latest HR trends

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Employee satisfaction surveys are a great way to stay in tune with what your employees are thinking. Get real insights on how to engage and motivate your team.

        Article      
Read Time: 10 min
Employee burnout can impact work quality and morale. Discover the warning signs for burnout and how to prevent it in your workplace.

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Being an effective leader requires more than just technical knowledge. Create an environment where everyone can thrive and understand emotions in oneself and others.
HCM Software
HR + Payroll Software
Talent Management
Workforce Management
Employee Experience
Benefits Administration
Quick Links
Services + Support
855-565-3285
Talk to Sales
855-752-8564
© 2023 Paycor, Inc  |  Refer Paycor  |  Privacy Policy  |  1-800-501-9462 |
*Represents approximately 30,000 corporate clients covering 40,000 businesses employing people