Pay Employees Faster: Direct Deposit, Pay Cards, and Earned Wage Access

Paying your employees can occur in different forms. Get the details here on pros and cons of direct deposit and payroll cards for your workforce.

Workforce Management
Last Updated: July 18, 2022 | Read Time: 10 min
It doesn’t take much business experience to know that getting your compensation strategy right is crucial for recruiting and retaining top talent. But, paying employees isn’t only a question of how much. You’ll also want to consider your payroll options, or how to pay employees as well. Especially for those managing hourly workers. Did you know:
If you consider these facts, especially in this intense war for talent, you’ll understand why finding the right payment methods and paying employees faster is very important. In fact, it could give you a competitive advantage. And, for hourly workers like those in healthcare, hospitality and restaurant industries with turnover as high as 150%, HR leaders must find creative ways to attract talent and keep high performers engaged during these turbulent times. Let’s take a look at the options.
Today, there are a number of ways employers can pay employees that don’t involve a trip to the bank. In addition to the traditional paper paycheck, payroll options include:
It’s important to note here that employers can also pay employees faster by activating something called earned wage access (EWA), also known as on demand pay. This benefit allows employees to view and access wages they’ve already earned and deposit funds into a bank account, onto a physical card, into a digital wallet app or get cash from a participating retailer.
Employees can’t afford to wait two weeks for payday. That’s why Paycor offers flexible pay options organizations can utilize to support their workforce, increase retention, and attract talent.
With OnDemand Pay built directly into our payroll solution, Paycor helps by enabling employers to provide employees access to their earned wages. It is available for all Paycor customers. Additionally, with OnDemand Pay, workers can easily access earned wages through a physical pay card or a digital pay card that can be spent using a digital wallet. By empowering employees to see what they’ve earned and access funds when they need it through Paycor Mobile, the peace of mind positively impacts employees who will come to work less stressed.
Paycor’s Mobile Wallet feature offers employees secure, timely access to wages and resources like financial wellness and counseling.
Key benefits include:
The most popular method of paying workers is through direct deposit. In fact, 94% of employees get paid this way, according to the 2020 “Getting Paid in America” Survey. When you consider the advantages, this is unsurprising:
Pay cards are cards through which employees receive wages in place of paper checks or direct deposit. Employers load their employee’s pay onto a pre-paid debit card at the end of each pay period. This method gives employers a way to pay employees electronic, while catering to all employees, not just those who have a conventional banking setup.
Employees are given a card with a PIN which is automatically reloaded each pay period. Employees can withdraw money or make purchases just like they would with a traditional debit card.
There are a few reasons employers might consider this a viable option:
To help make things even easier for employees, pay cards can also be used and stored completely digitally. This expedites payment and eliminates the wait for physical cards. Employees just opt to securely store their pay card information within a virtual wallet app on their smartphone.
Now that many American workers are looking for help with financial wellbeing (80% to be exact) it might help to consider all of the options available to alleviate financial stress. Employees can be more focused at work when they are not consumed with worry about their financial situation. Additionally, it has been proven that employees with early access to earned wages are more likely to stay at a company longer and have increased morale (HBS 2022).
Remember, even if you’re attempting to go paperless, check the legislation in your state. Many states require employers to offer pay stubs, and some specify these must be printed.
Finding the best way to pay employees isn’t easy, but partnering with the right payroll provider can help. Paycor offers multiple payment methods, including direct deposit, payroll cards, digital wallet payment and paper checks. What’s more, we automate the creation of pay stubs to comply with the labor law wherever you are. Our intuitive and easy-to-use software simplifies the entire payroll process and with dedicated support from HR experts, you can be sure you’re always compliant with ever-changing regulations.
 Previous:
Next:
Stay up to date with the latest HR trends

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Employee satisfaction surveys are a great way to stay in tune with what your employees are thinking. Get real insights on how to engage and motivate your team.

        Article      
Read Time: 10 min
Employee burnout can impact work quality and morale. Discover the warning signs for burnout and how to prevent it in your workplace.

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Being an effective leader requires more than just technical knowledge. Create an environment where everyone can thrive and understand emotions in oneself and others.
HCM Software
HR + Payroll Software
Talent Management
Workforce Management
Employee Experience
Benefits Administration
Quick Links
Services + Support
855-565-3285
Talk to Sales
855-752-8564
© 2023 Paycor, Inc  |  Refer Paycor  |  Privacy Policy  |  1-800-501-9462 |
*Represents approximately 30,000 corporate clients covering 40,000 businesses employing people