3 Reasons CFOs Should Care About Employee Benefits

Financial leaders should be taking an interest in HR and starting to expand their influence. Are you? Get started here!

Benefits Administration
Last Updated:  August 16, 2019 | Read Time: 4 min
If you think the realm of employee benefits is strictly HR’s domain, it’s time to change your thinking. Labor costs, including employee benefits, is often the largest expense of any organization and should be closely watched by both HR and finance.
More financial leaders are taking an interest in human resources and starting to expand their influence outside the traditional areas of accounting. A recent Robert Half survey showed CFOs are more likely to expand their reach into HR more than any other department.
39% of CFOs said their role expanded into HR the most
Source: Robert Half
If you’re hands-off when it comes to employee benefits, it’s time to get his/her attention. Here are three reasons why a CFO should care:
With a healthier workforce you should see a reduction in:
At the same time, see an improvement in:
Trying to save a nickel with a sub-par benefits plan can come back to haunt you. Employees today expect first-class benefits or else they’ll go looking elsewhere. Turnover is a real expense—if you want to attract and retain your industry’s top talent, be sure to offer a competitive benefits plan that appeals to multigenerational workers.
Whatever benefits plans you choose, it’s important to have an efficient and educational process to introduce them to your workforce. Paycor’s benefits solution can help you simplify and automate the open enrollment process, help your employees understand their benefits options with decision-support tools and provide real-time analytics so you can maximize the value of your benefits program.
1. International Foundation of Employee Benefit Plans

 Previous:
Next:
Stay up to date with the latest HR trends

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Employee satisfaction surveys are a great way to stay in tune with what your employees are thinking. Get real insights on how to engage and motivate your team.

        Article      
Read Time: 10 min
Employee burnout can impact work quality and morale. Discover the warning signs for burnout and how to prevent it in your workplace.

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Being an effective leader requires more than just technical knowledge. Create an environment where everyone can thrive and understand emotions in oneself and others.
HCM Software
HR + Payroll Software
Talent Management
Workforce Management
Employee Experience
Benefits Administration
Quick Links
Services + Support
855-565-3285
Talk to Sales
855-752-8564
© 2023 Paycor, Inc  |  Refer Paycor  |  Privacy Policy  |  1-800-501-9462 |
*Represents approximately 30,000 corporate clients covering 40,000 businesses employing people