What Companies Should Know About Open Enrollment

With the right information, open enrollment doesn’t have to be stressful. Let’s look at the top 7 questions HR professionals have around open enrollment for health plans.

Benefits Administration
Last Updated: October 6, 2022 | Read Time: 8 min
According to the Bureau of Labor Statistics, employee benefits are available to 74 percent of American workers, which equates to a lot of work for HR professionals during open enrollment periods (BLS). However, with the right information, open enrollment doesn’t have to be stressful. With a better understanding of the process (and the right partners) your HR team can experience lower levels of stress and higher levels of efficiency during your next open enrollment.
Let’s look at the top 7 questions HR professionals have around open enrollment for health plans.
Open enrollment is a period during the year, generally 2-to-4 weeks long, when companies allow their employees to make changes or additions to their elected fringe benefits such as health insurance, unemployment benefits or retirement plans.
The open enrollment period differs for every company. If a company is on a calendar-year plan, benefits coverage often kicks-off January 1. This means open enrollment could start 1-2 months prior to coverage.
Keep in mind that some states have their own enrollment platforms for health insurance, so be sure to review your state requirements.
Getting organized ahead of time will help streamline your open enrollment process. You can do this by:
It’s impossible to make smart decisions about benefits without data. Paycor’s HR software allows employers to access status reports to see the progress of the current open enrollment, compare coverage costs from different years and gauge how employee election trends from year to year.
Collect all the relevant information from your employees.
Share details about the current plan so that employees can use that as a guide to make decisions as to what they will need in the new plan year.
According to a recent survey, 86% of employees are confused about benefits (Business Solver). To alleviate this confusion, employers must hold ‘benefit conversations’ throughout the year, not just during open enrollment. The topic of benefits is often complicated and very dry, so having a well-developed ‘benefits marketing program’ can help ensure your employees fully understand their options.
And that conversation should take many different forms. Since there are currently five generations participating in the workforce, one blanketed communication method won’t cover everyone.
Consider these additional ways to reach your entire workforce:
If you’re sending out information electronically, make sure you have current personal email addresses on file so that employees, especially remote and non-office workers, can access the details of the health insurance plan at home.
The onus of enrolling in a benefits plan falls completely onto the employee to whom it is offered. If an employee does not sign up during the open enrollment period, they will not be able to be a part of the initial plan offering.
There are still options that could see them engage in the benefits offered by the company. That’s because there are special enrollment periods they could qualify for. These could include a life event, a change in their household income level or the loss of an existing health plan. One of these events usually triggers a 30-day window to enroll in the company’s benefits plan.  
Employees also have the option of seeking short-term health insurance, outside of the company’s offered packages. These short-term plans will provide them with a health insurance plan if they missed the enrollment deadline. Short-term plans offer some flexibility to employees to enable them to get limited health insurance coverage.
Listen to our recent Benefits Compliance webinar to help companies understand compliance requirements.
You may also want to take a tour of the Paycor Benefits Advisor program. It’s a robust, and easy to manage tool that can help take some of the headache out of open enrollment.
 Previous:
Next:
Stay up to date with the latest HR trends

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Employee satisfaction surveys are a great way to stay in tune with what your employees are thinking. Get real insights on how to engage and motivate your team.

        Article      
Read Time: 10 min
Employee burnout can impact work quality and morale. Discover the warning signs for burnout and how to prevent it in your workplace.

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Being an effective leader requires more than just technical knowledge. Create an environment where everyone can thrive and understand emotions in oneself and others.
HCM Software
HR + Payroll Software
Talent Management
Workforce Management
Employee Experience
Benefits Administration
Quick Links
Services + Support
855-565-3285
Talk to Sales
855-752-8564
© 2023 Paycor, Inc  |  Refer Paycor  |  Privacy Policy  |  1-800-501-9462 |
*Represents approximately 30,000 corporate clients covering 40,000 businesses employing people