Workplace Bullying Laws: What Managers Need to Know 

Workplace bullying is a problem that's on the rise. It's not innocent, and employers can be liable. Get tips to navigate bullying.

Employee Experience
Last Updated: November 30, 2021 | Read Time: 8 min
Although some actions may seem like innocent teasing or a joke at first, many behaviors can constitute workplace bullying, a problem that’s on the rise. A recent survey by the Workplace Bullying Institute (WBI) found 30 percent of U.S. workers report being bullied at work (up from 17 percent just four years ago). That’s an estimated 48 million workers who are bullied on the job. Fortunately, there are several things you can do to protect your workplace culture from becoming a place that fosters bullying and harassment. But, before you do, we’re here to ensure you have all the facts first.
Workplace bullying is defined by the Workplace Bullying Institute as: 
There are many examples of bullying, from abusive yelling, use of foul language or other verbal abuse. The move to remote work during the pandemic did not curtail workplace bullying, with the WPI finding 43 percent of remote workers either being bullied or witnessing bullying of remote workers.
There is no specific federal law that addresses bullying specifically, but if the person being bullied is part of a protected group (e.g., workers over 40 or women), bullying becomes harassment and can result in legal action. 
Harassment is generally described as unwelcome conduct or behavior directed toward a person that appears to be disturbing, upsetting or threatening. Harassment is intentional, repetitive and can also involve a physical element (invasion of space). Bullying turns into harassment when it is aimed at someone because of their race, color, religion, sex (including sexual orientation, gender identity, or pregnancy), national origin, age, disability, or genetic information (including family medical history) and is illegal when proven as such.
Equally important, a workplace that tolerates bullying becomes unattractive to employees, leads to higher absenteeism, decreased morale and lower individual performance.  A toxic work culture also makes it costly to find and retain quality employees.
In fact, in a recent study of 800 managers and employees in 17 industries who had experienced bullying, 48% of respondents intentionally decreased work effort and 80% lost work time.
Developing a better understanding of bullying and ways to stop it is essential for managers looking to maintain a healthy, safe workplace.
Bullying can begin with small acts of rudeness, disrespect or rudeness. Additionally, low-level conflict or joking can quickly escalate into bullying. If any of these are left unaddressed, a negative atmosphere can develop.
Bullying doesn’t have to be verbal, and the rise of social media channels, including company chat platforms, offer a virtual way for bullies to create a hostile work environment for employees. Experts believe bullying generally comes from an overall poor workplace culture, and often stems from managers being afraid of failure.
The WPI survey also found the majority of bullies hold management roles, but bullying can easily happen between workers or even from non-employees. Bullying behavior is often not reported out of fear or retaliation or an employee believing nothing will be done to correct the problem.
A hostile work environment exists when employees are subjected to continued harassment, discrimination or intimidation that make it difficult to complete their jobs. A hostile work environment includes but is not limited to harsh joking or language, physical touching, suggestive remarks, sexually suggestive photos on display, and other conduct that can make others uncomfortable or offended. Additionally, a hostile work environment is created with management or supervisors participate in the activities and the intended participation of others becomes a condition of employment. To avoid your workplace being considered a hostile work environment, employers have a responsibility to investigate claims of bullying and harassment immediately and take corrective action.
As noted earlier, there is no federal law that specifically targets workplace bullying,  but the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC) does mention that employees are protected from workplace harassment by Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, the Age Discrimination in Employment Act of 1967, (ADEA), and the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990, (ADA). However, when it comes eliminating bullying at the start before it becomes harassment, some states are beginning to take action. Currently, the Workplace Bullying Institute has provided the Healthy Workplace Bill (HWB) and it has been introduced into 30 state legislatures, but no states have yet written it into law. A few states and territories, however, have enacted laws that protect workers from bullying and harassment by requiring training and outlawing bullying actions.
Workplace bullying is clearly a problem for businesses, and leaders are wise to work to curb bullying behaviors. A good place to start is to conduct an anonymous survey to look at employee culture and learn if there are concerns. Next, consider creating a workplace civility policy that includes the following:
Getting employee buy-in as you build these policies can make them more effective.
Finally, create training sessions as part of new employee or management onboarding to set expectations about appropriate workplace behavior.  Taking the above steps will help you create a healthy corporate culture, setting an expectation for appropriate behavior in your workplace. Read more about creating a positive work culture.
Paycor builds HR solutions for leaders. With Paycor, you can modernize every aspect of people management, from the way you recruit, onboard and develop your team, to the way you pay and retain them. See how Paycor can help the leaders of your organization solve the problems of today and tomorrow.
 Previous:
Next:
Stay up to date with the latest HR trends

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Employee satisfaction surveys are a great way to stay in tune with what your employees are thinking. Get real insights on how to engage and motivate your team.

        Article      
Read Time: 10 min
Employee burnout can impact work quality and morale. Discover the warning signs for burnout and how to prevent it in your workplace.

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Being an effective leader requires more than just technical knowledge. Create an environment where everyone can thrive and understand emotions in oneself and others.
HCM Software
HR + Payroll Software
Talent Management
Workforce Management
Employee Experience
Benefits Administration
Quick Links
Services + Support
855-565-3285
Talk to Sales
855-752-8564
© 2023 Paycor, Inc  |  Refer Paycor  |  Privacy Policy  |  1-800-501-9462 |
*Represents approximately 30,000 corporate clients covering 40,000 businesses employing people