Paycheck Protection Program (PPP): Loan Forgiveness

Small businesses who received PPP funds may qualify for forgiveness. See the SBA guidelines here.

Workforce Management
Last Updated:  December 21, 2020 | Read Time: 9 min
UPDATE DECEMBER 21: The latest COVID-19 stimulus package passed by Congress, which assigned a further $284 billion PPP funds, also clarified an important aspect of loan forgiveness. It’s now official that businesses can deduct business expenses paid with forgivable loans, contrary to the previous position help by the Treasury Department.
UPDATE OCTOBER 21: The SBA has published updates to its frequently asked questions on loan forgiveness.
UPDATE OCTOBER 12: The SBA have released a further, simplified form (Form 3508S) for loans of $50,000 or less. Businesses can access the form here. The official announcement—with instructions on completing the form—can be found here. The actual text of the new interim ruling is here.
UPDATE JUNE 22: The SBA have released a new “borrower-friendly” loan forgiveness application form and have also created the simplified SBA Form 3508EZ for loan recipients who have not reduced the salaries or hours of employees by more than 25%.
UPDATE June 05: This article has been updated to include changes in the loan forgiveness process specified in the Paycheck Protection Program Flexibility Act.
The Paycheck Protection Program (PPP) has provided an essential lifeline to lucky businesses who were successful with their applications—and the good news is, these loans are forgivable. However, businesses can’t breathe easy yet. Business must first apply for loan forgiveness, provide documentation of spending and prove that the bulk of the received funds were spent on eligible costs.
The Paycheck Protection Program was established as part of the Coronavirus Aid Relief & Economic Security (CARES) Act, to offer small business low interest and forgivable loans that allow them to keep their employees on payroll (though certain other essential expenditures are permitted).
After the initial $349 billion was exhausted within two weeks, applications reopened on April 27 with further funding of $310 billion. This later funding has aimed to support smaller businesses without existing banking relationships, who initially struggled to apply.
While loan forgiveness is not limited to payroll expenditure, payroll costs must be 60% or more of any forgiven amount. All costs, payroll and non-payroll, are only forgivable if paid or incurred during the borrower’s chosen ‘Covered Period’ of 8 or 24 weeks after the receipt of loan funds.
Note: payroll costs for employees whose principle place of residence is not in the United States are not covered.
The forgivable amount will be reduced if during Covered Period, when compared to the period January 1, 2020 through March 31, 2020, there is:
However, there are a couple of important exemptions that can work in borrowers’ favor:
There are further exemptions if an employee is fired for cause, resigns voluntarily or voluntarily requests a reduction in their number of hours.
UPDATE OCTOBER 21: The SBA have published new guidance answering many frequently asked questions on the loan forgiveness process.
UPDATE OCTOBER 12: The SBA have released a further simplified loan forgiveness form for loans of $50,000 or less. Businesses can access the form here. The official announcement—with instructions on completing the form—can be found here. The actual text of the new interim ruling is here.
UPDATE JUNE 22: The SBA have released a new “borrower-friendly” loan forgiveness application form and have now also created the simplified SBA Form 3508EZ for many businesses.
Business owners can use the new EZ form if they meet any of the following criteria:
In order for a loan to be forgiven, recipients must complete a PPP Loan Forgiveness Application form, provided by the Small Business Administration (SBA). However, as with the initial loan, the application for forgiveness much be submitted directly to your lender.
The form requires business owners to calculate the forgivable amount and any possible reductions. The document offers guidance on how to complete the worksheet but the SBA may issue further, more detailed guidance in the coming weeks.
(The SBA is expected to provide an updated application form which accounts for the changes to the loan forgiveness process detailed in the PPP Flexibility Act.)
Here’s the information you’ll need:
Business owners will need to provide the following documentation:
The following is not required but may be requested by the SBA:
Paycor builds HR software for leaders of medium & small business. For 30 years, we’ve been listening to and partnering with leaders, so we know what they need: HCM technology that saves time, powerful analytics and expert HR advice to help them solve problems and achieve their goals. Get our latest guide: 9 Ways To Manage Costs And Prepare For Future Growth
Paycor is not a legal, tax, benefit, accounting or investment advisor. All communication from Paycor should be confirmed by your company’s legal, tax, benefit, accounting or investment advisor before making any decisions.
 Previous:
Next:
Stay up to date with the latest HR trends

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Employee satisfaction surveys are a great way to stay in tune with what your employees are thinking. Get real insights on how to engage and motivate your team.

        Article      
Read Time: 10 min
Employee burnout can impact work quality and morale. Discover the warning signs for burnout and how to prevent it in your workplace.

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Being an effective leader requires more than just technical knowledge. Create an environment where everyone can thrive and understand emotions in oneself and others.
HCM Software
HR + Payroll Software
Talent Management
Workforce Management
Employee Experience
Benefits Administration
Quick Links
Services + Support
855-565-3285
Talk to Sales
855-752-8564
© 2023 Paycor, Inc  |  Refer Paycor  |  Privacy Policy  |  1-800-501-9462 |
*Represents approximately 30,000 corporate clients covering 40,000 businesses employing people