TECH+ 2021: Executive Summary

TECH+ is Paycor's annual conference for benefits brokers, financial advisors and HR consultants. See the top 11 conference takeaways here.

Employee Experience
Last Updated: February 8, 2021 | Read Time: 15 min
Paycor hosted TECH+, our annual national partner conference on Feb 1st and 2nd and this year, the event was virtual. As always, TECH+ brought together benefits brokers, financial advisors and HR consultants for two days of learning, insights and strategies designed to improve business development and client retention. View the sessions on-demand, here.
Benefits teams are in the spotlight now that American business is undergoing a “revolution in caring.” Business leaders are focused on making improvements:
Leaders know data is important, but they don’t always know what to do with it. The solution is to get trustworthy data from their analytics solutions.
With the right technology, you can watch the data unfold and then talk to your clients about pivoting to make sure their plans meet the needs of their members (ex. Generational cohort analysis).
The role of HR is evolving to be more flexible and align with organizational objectives. Successful HR teams invest in 3 key areas: talent management, benefits and HR operations. As a broker, you are in a unique position to help your clients build the case for investment in additional headcount or an HCM technology solution.
Manufacturing is in an interesting spot: there’s a lot of growth and demand, but leaders face challenges in talent management, workforce management, employee experience and benefit administration.
Value-add sales for manufacturing is all about showing how HCM technology can provide a return on investment. Here’s how:
Become an industry expert
Prioritize prospects in your ideal customer profile
Add value to clients, prospects, partners at every step
TECH+ attendees were treated to a conversation with Tony Award-winning actor, Leslie Odom, Jr. He talked about quarantining with his family, learning to play chess and cooking his favorite Asian cuisine. Best of all, he sang a few songs from the hit Broadway musical, Hamilton. Here are just a few highlights from the one-hour conversation:
“Why was Hamilton such a phenomenon? I think because it was a well-made thing. And anything well-made is good. Sometimes in our need for speed, we can forget quality.”
“Some decisions you make to prove who you are to yourself. We have ideas of who we are. But it’s the private moments of integrity. Take the risk—I wanted to be able to look at myself in the mirror.”
“There is no need for courage if fear isn’t present. The only chance to develop that virtue of courage is when there’s a little bit of fear in it.”
It’s important to choose a partner that doesn’t compete with you. At Paycor, we’re here to provide you with resources that help retain your existing clients and attract new ones. How? Through the four pillars of Industry, Expertise, Service and Loyalty.
Consumers want to engage with brands that are setting new standards in meeting their expectations.
At Paycor, we invest in resources that help you connect with new clients and retain your existing relationships. Paycor’s loyalty program, Inside Track, gives you access to tools and services that align with your business development strategy and will help you grow.
Your clients receive a unique, personalized implementation experience that separates Paycor from other providers. And our Partner Care program is set up to make sure you have everything you need to meet and exceed your clients’ expectations.
2020 made a big impact on HR, from the disruptions of COVID to breaking new ground in diversity, equity and inclusion.
What lessons did we learn?
What’s on the HR horizon in 2021?
1. New Focus on Employee Health
2. Diversity, Equity, Inclusion Initiatives
3. The Need for HR Skills (critical thinking)
4. The New Candidate
5. Training
6. New Laws & Decisions
Sixty-six percent of CFOs said their HR departments have an average or worse than average impact on the bottom line of their business. This is evidence that there’s a significant opportunity for brokers to help HR professionals and benefits professionals show the C-suite the value of their efforts.
Getting to ROI can be simplified by assigning value to every HR action in every pillar of HR excellence: recruiting, benefits, labor costs, people management, compliance and employee experience. Leverage years of metrics from more than 5,000 organizations and published industry benchmarks against your client’s actual costs with the Paycor ROI tool. You can:
Use Paycor’s ROI tool to create meaningful metrics and enable your clients to tell HR success stories using the language that CFOs speak.
The financial industry is going through dramatic changes, including a renewed focus on leveling the playing field. The following are just some of the questions financial institutions are asking about how best to reach out to traditionally underrepresented groups.
As a result, many employees are turning to other sources for advice:
For some, they’ve never had retirement…an “American retirement” is a foreign concept to first-generation Americans.
Top 5 ways respondents want to learn about retirement:
Paycor is the only HCM company delivering technology and expertise for long-term healthcare. How do we solve the challenges unique to long-term healthcare?
We create customized product solutions for long-term healthcare leaders to help solve their biggest challenges, including:
Paycor has more than 6,200 healthcare customers, which means we pay more than 175,000 healthcare employees.
As a broker, you need to determine your industry strategy. Prioritize prospects in your ideal customer profile. Put a communication plan in place for those key accounts. We can help you with co-branded materials. Become an industry expert. Add value to clients, prospects, partners at every step.
Yes – remote work is here to stay!
Managers are finding there’s a lot of efficiencies: companies are seeing 15-40% increase in productivity, 10-15% reduction in turnover, 40% reduction in absenteeism and more than 20% in cost savings. To succeed, companies need to adopt strategies that are being evolved as we speak, including:
The search for talent (best practices):
Talent retention:
Maintain corporate culture:
There are now 4.5 million fewer women in the workforce than before COVID-19. That’s a daunting problem, but now’s the perfect opportunity to tackle this issue. Here’s how to get started:
 Previous:
Next:
Stay up to date with the latest HR trends

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Employee satisfaction surveys are a great way to stay in tune with what your employees are thinking. Get real insights on how to engage and motivate your team.

        Article      
Read Time: 10 min
Employee burnout can impact work quality and morale. Discover the warning signs for burnout and how to prevent it in your workplace.

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Being an effective leader requires more than just technical knowledge. Create an environment where everyone can thrive and understand emotions in oneself and others.
HCM Software
HR + Payroll Software
Talent Management
Workforce Management
Employee Experience
Benefits Administration
Quick Links
Services + Support
855-565-3285
Talk to Sales
855-752-8564
© 2023 Paycor, Inc  |  Refer Paycor  |  Privacy Policy  |  1-800-501-9462 |
*Represents approximately 30,000 corporate clients covering 40,000 businesses employing people