How to Create a Business Travel Policy

With the pandemic becoming more manageable, employees are resuming  travel. Set up a business travel policy using this free downloadable template.

Workforce Management
Last Updated: August 3, 2021 | Read Time: 5 min
As pandemic-related restrictions begin to ease in the U.S. and in several other countries, many companies realize their business travel policies do not reflect the emerging business landscape. As of mid-2021, business travel is still down 70% from pre-pandemic levels, according to the Wall Street Journal, but it’s now set to rebound fast. The sudden shift to remote work showed that in-person meetings can’t be easily replaced. That’s part of the reason why increased numbers of colleagues working remotely will actually lead to more business travel, industry experts suggest.
No matter what the future holds, the past 18 months have shown the importance of having clear guidelines for employee business travel. A clear, comprehensive corporate business travel policy is essential. If you already have a policy, it may well have been put on pause—now is the time to review your current policies and consider what changes are required going forward .
Consider whether remote workers who need to travel to meetings at the home office will be reimbursed and at what level. Define “essential” travel for times or locations with travel restrictions in place. Discuss whether meetings that were changed to remote during the pandemic will stay that way. Decide what “travel time” is for exempt and non-exempt employees—for what hours will they be paid?
While the precise details will depend on the size of your business and the company in which you operate, effective business travel policies will include the following features:
To give businesses a head start, Paycor is offering a free business travel policy template. Once downloaded, the text can be customized to suit the needs of your business.
 Previous:
Next:
Stay up to date with the latest HR trends
HCM Software
HR + Payroll Software
Talent Management
Workforce Management
Employee Experience
Benefits Administration
Quick Links
Services + Support
855-565-3285
Talk to Sales
855-752-8564
© 2023 Paycor, Inc  |  Refer Paycor  |  Privacy Policy  |  1-800-501-9462 |
*Represents approximately 30,000 corporate clients covering 40,000 businesses employing people