Career Development Planning: 10 Tips for Employers

Just about all employees want to know how to get promoted. Employers can provide answers by using these 10 career development tips.

Employee Experience
Last Updated:  March 6, 2020 | Read Time: 7 min
“How do I get promoted?” It’s what every employee wants to know. Even if they aren’t asking you, it doesn’t mean they aren’t thinking it. However, finding the right answer isn’t always easy.
The good news is, by clearly laying out what an employee can achieve and what it will take to make it happen, a well-thought-out career development plan doesn’t just answer that all-important question, it gives employees a reason to stay as well as providing renewed focus and motivation.
Careers are unpredictable and knowing that someone is looking out for you can provide a great reason not to jump ship. Of course, this benefits both sides. Companies need productive employees, but they also benefit from employees who are motivated to improve themselves.
So, it’s important to make career planning a process, rather than a one-off event. The opportunity for further discussion and re-reassessment should always be available.
At the same time, employers need to be open too. Creating an ambitious career plan is a great way for a manager to give an employee a show of faith in their potential. If this goes unsaid, an employee may seek somewhere they know they’ll be appreciated.
Before you plan an exciting career path for an employee, you have to encourage them to really ask themselves what it really is they are looking for. A big promotion might be their dream, but if it turns out they’ll be no longer working on projects they currently enjoy, are they sure their heart will really be in it?
That doesn’t mean leaving your star talent to look elsewhere. Developing internal candidates is great—you save on recruiting costs while strengthening company culture. But you are investing time and finance in your employees, so you have to ensure that it doesn’t go to waste.
That’s why companies need to create different employee progression pathways, where status (and salary) can rise without the burden of management responsibility. For instance, a talented software developer may not be suited to the role of managing other developers but could earn a similar increase in prestige and compensation with promotion to Software Architect, a more technical position.
If it later turns out you can’t find the funding, it’ll be a killer for employee engagement. And worse—in some states such promises from employers may even be considered legally binding.
Those approaching the end of their years in the workforce may be less interested in personal growth, instead seeking a more granular step-by-step plan for achieving their final career goals.
If a commitment to career planning convinces employees that sticking around long-term is worthwhile, you can supercharge your efforts to keep engagement up and turnover down.
Paycor HR offers the technology and expertise that HR leaders need to modernize how they manage and develop their people. Download our guide on How to Recruit, Coach and Develop Teams.
 Previous:
Next:
Stay up to date with the latest HR trends

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Employee satisfaction surveys are a great way to stay in tune with what your employees are thinking. Get real insights on how to engage and motivate your team.

        Article      
Read Time: 10 min
Employee burnout can impact work quality and morale. Discover the warning signs for burnout and how to prevent it in your workplace.

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Being an effective leader requires more than just technical knowledge. Create an environment where everyone can thrive and understand emotions in oneself and others.
HCM Software
HR + Payroll Software
Talent Management
Workforce Management
Employee Experience
Benefits Administration
Quick Links
Services + Support
855-565-3285
Talk to Sales
855-752-8564
© 2023 Paycor, Inc  |  Refer Paycor  |  Privacy Policy  |  1-800-501-9462 |
*Represents approximately 30,000 corporate clients covering 40,000 businesses employing people