Types of Work Shifts, Schedules, and Working Hours

If you’re a business owner scheduling shift work, it’s important you know all the different types of work shifts and how best to schedule your workers.

Workforce Management
Last Updated: August 12, 2022 | Read Time: 9 min
9-to-5 is shorthand for the workday (Thanks, Dolly Parton!) but it’s not an entirely accurate description of when people are getting the job done. In many industries, shift coverage is required around the clock. The solution is known as shift work: employees working at different times throughout the day (and night).
Seems like an obvious solution, right? It can be, but if you’re new to HR the terms used to describe common shifts can be confusing. And when it comes to scheduling shift work, keeping everyone happy can be challenging even for seasoned experts.
Here’s a refresher on different types of work shifts, schedules and working hours.
Before you can understand the types of shifts, it helps to know the various categories of employees whose schedules you’ll be setting.
With this understanding of the types of categories a worker could fill, you can next figure out how to best use them to meet the needs of your company.
Employers tend to use different shift schedules to:
Unsurprisingly there is no universal “healthiest shift” to work. Each work shift has its own benefits and drawbacks, but those are felt most on an individual worker basis. For example, one study, in the medical journal Ergonomics, found a correlation between age and tolerance for shift work.
Your responsibility as an employer is to gauge the abilities and physical and mental needs of each employee and use that knowledge to place them into an appropriate work shift. For example, it can be hard to adjust to working nights, so it’s best practice for employees to find out their future shifts far in advance, giving them time to taper their sleep schedules accordingly.
The big question for employers is whether to create one regular schedule and force employees to stick with it or offer more freedom for employees to choose their own schedules. What we know for sure is that the earlier schedules are released, the better. Note that this can also be a compliance issue: Some jurisdictions have predictive work schedule laws that punish companies for changing schedules at the last minute.
While splitting up schedules into shifts is easy enough, knowing the best strategy for assigning employees is a different matter. The simplest method is to create fixed shifts, where some employees work the same days per week while others always work nights; however, you might not have enough qualified staff who are willing to always work nights. If this is the case, you can use rotating shifts.
The right scheduling software will make all the difference. Not only does an automated solution allow you to create and publish schedules quicker than ever, but you can also assign roles yourself (to ensure you have the right spread of skills and seniority) and then create open shifts which remaining employees can pick up.
Scheduling software can also give employees somewhat flexible work schedules in that it allows them to swap shifts with other employees, without managers having to act as a go-between, saving valuable time while avoiding no-shows. With more control over their schedules, and plenty of advance warning, shift workers can more easily achieve work/life balance, offering a great boost to employee engagement.
Here are five things to consider when choosing a scheduling software.
Paycor Scheduling helps businesses optimize their work schedules, manage labor cost and makes life easier for both managers and employees.
 Previous:
Next:
Stay up to date with the latest HR trends

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Employee satisfaction surveys are a great way to stay in tune with what your employees are thinking. Get real insights on how to engage and motivate your team.

        Article      
Read Time: 10 min
Employee burnout can impact work quality and morale. Discover the warning signs for burnout and how to prevent it in your workplace.

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Being an effective leader requires more than just technical knowledge. Create an environment where everyone can thrive and understand emotions in oneself and others.
HCM Software
HR + Payroll Software
Talent Management
Workforce Management
Employee Experience
Benefits Administration
Quick Links
Services + Support
855-565-3285
Talk to Sales
855-752-8564
© 2023 Paycor, Inc  |  Refer Paycor  |  Privacy Policy  |  1-800-501-9462 |
*Represents approximately 30,000 corporate clients covering 40,000 businesses employing people