How Long to Keep Payroll Records

The IRS or Dept. of Labor may request to see your payroll records. Ensure you're compliant with the regulations by reviewing these guidelines.

Workforce Management
Last Updated:  December 24, 2020 | Read Time: 6 min
Running a business, you know that compliance isn’t just about being compliant—you also need to prove it. You never know when the IRS, the DOL or the EEOC will demand to see your paperwork, which is why it’s so important to retain payroll records. To make things more complicated, each agency has its own rules for which documents you have to keep and for how long. The good news is, you don’t have to buy more filing cabinets. HR software can automatically store everything you need, with the added benefit of simplifying the whole payroll process.
At a federal level, you’re keeping payroll records primarily for three agencies:
These organizations are tasked with enforcing legislation to make sure you pay employees fairly, get your tax calculations correct and avoid discrimination. Watch out: some legislation can be enforced by multiple agencies.
 
The IRS wants you to keep payroll records relating to employment taxes for at least four years. This period begins after you’ve filed at the end of the year. Here’s when having online data storage pays dividends—there’s a lot of information to maintain. If audited, you could be asked for:
The Wage and Hour Division (WHD) of the Department of Labor enforces employee rights as detailed in the Fair Labor Standards Act (FLSA). Payroll records related to this must be retained for at least three years and related records showing how you determined wages (e.g., time cards, schedules and wage rate tables) must be kept for at least two years. The WHD can ask for employee’s personal information, how long they work and their pay. Though there’s no specific documentation listed, it’s best practice to keep the following, for all non-exempt employees:
 
It’s the job of the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC) to fight against discrimination in the workplace. To make sure that you aren’t paying certain groups of workers less, the EEOC can ask for payroll records and related documents. The following records should be kept for between 1 and 3 years:
 
To make things even more complicated, some federal acts are jointly governed by the IRS and the DOL. For FMLA compliance, all relevant documentation (including pay stubs, if applicable) should be retained for at least three years. The Employee Retirement Income Security Act (ERISA) mandates that documentation related to retirement and 401 (k) plans be retained for at least six years. This may include enrollment documents, proof of payments and payroll deductions.
 
Employers also need to be aware of state-specific rules. In New York, the Wage Theft Prevention Act mandates that payroll records be kept for at least 6 years, double the length of standard DOL guidelines. In California, records for non-exempt employees must be kept for at least four years, while for exempt employees this extends to at least eight years. In Illinois, payroll records must be kept for at least five years.
Knowing what documentation to store and keeping track of complex, ever-changing legislation just isn’t practical without a little help. The good news is, Paycor offers the technology and expertise business leaders need to save time and stay compliant. Our Human Capital Management (HCM) platform modernizes every aspect of people management, from the way you recruit, onboard and develop people, to the way you pay and retain them. ,000 organization are partnered with Paycor by talking with a representative today.
 Previous:
Next:
Stay up to date with the latest HR trends

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Employee satisfaction surveys are a great way to stay in tune with what your employees are thinking. Get real insights on how to engage and motivate your team.

        Article      
Read Time: 10 min
Employee burnout can impact work quality and morale. Discover the warning signs for burnout and how to prevent it in your workplace.

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Being an effective leader requires more than just technical knowledge. Create an environment where everyone can thrive and understand emotions in oneself and others.
HCM Software
HR + Payroll Software
Talent Management
Workforce Management
Employee Experience
Benefits Administration
Quick Links
Services + Support
855-565-3285
Talk to Sales
855-752-8564
© 2023 Paycor, Inc  |  Refer Paycor  |  Privacy Policy  |  1-800-501-9462 |
*Represents approximately 30,000 corporate clients covering 40,000 businesses employing people