To Avoid an HR and Payroll Implementation Nightmare, Ask ONE Question

Don't settle for mediocre HCM technology. Learn what to ask before you implement a new system.

Workforce Management
Last Updated:  March 11, 2019 | Read Time: 2 min
HR and payroll technology affect every aspect of your business, so if your current provider isn’t meeting your needs, your entire organization suffers. And yet so many business leaders settle for mediocre HCM because they’re (legitimately) afraid of implementing a new system. The good news: you can avoid an implementation nightmare by asking one simple question:
How can you tell if you’re working with a collaborative HCM company? It’s easy. Ask yourself: Do they talk more than they listen? If so, they probably aren’t taking the time to understand the particulars of your business, which is the root cause of most implementation nightmares.
Related Article: 5 Questions to Ask Before Implementing a New Payroll and HR System
Devote dedicated resources to you. Whether it’s a single implementation specialist or a team, an HCM provider who commits resources specifically to your project is another good sign.
Bring expertise to the table. For example, does your implementation team understand the compliance and tax laws specific to your industry and region?
Over-communicate. Nothing about the implementation process should come as a surprise. You should be involved in creating the schedule for your implementation–including the go-live date—and base it around what time of the year works best for your organization. Once the schedule is created, you should receive status calls and/or emails to keep you updated on what’s happening. At no point should you feel like you’re “in the dark.”
Looking for a collaborative HCM partner? Check out what makes Paycor different than your current HR and payroll provider.

 Previous:
Next:
Stay up to date with the latest HR trends

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Employee satisfaction surveys are a great way to stay in tune with what your employees are thinking. Get real insights on how to engage and motivate your team.

        Article      
Read Time: 10 min
Employee burnout can impact work quality and morale. Discover the warning signs for burnout and how to prevent it in your workplace.

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Being an effective leader requires more than just technical knowledge. Create an environment where everyone can thrive and understand emotions in oneself and others.
HCM Software
HR + Payroll Software
Talent Management
Workforce Management
Employee Experience
Benefits Administration
Quick Links
Services + Support
855-565-3285
Talk to Sales
855-752-8564
© 2023 Paycor, Inc  |  Refer Paycor  |  Privacy Policy  |  1-800-501-9462 |
*Represents approximately 30,000 corporate clients covering 40,000 businesses employing people