Does Commission Pay Count?

With the recently passed overtime rule changes to the Fair Labor Standards Act, employers need to be informed. Get answers here!

Workforce Management
Last Updated:  June 21, 2016 | Read Time: 4 min
With the recently passed overtime rule changes to the Fair Labor Standards Act, employers are likely
asking a lot of questions. Which of my employees are newly eligible for
overtime? How closely do I really have to track things? And, what about
tips, bonuses, and other wages that aren’t part of an employee’s salary
but do factor into their annual take-home pay?
These are all great questions, and
HR Support Center has the information you need. Take a look at our
recent question about commission pay, below, and check out
Paycor’s Department of Labor Resource Center to find other answers you need.
_DOL RULES UPDATE
On November 22, a U.S. District ruled in favor of an injunction blocking
the final overtime rules from being implemented on December 1, 2016. At
this time, we are awaiting more information on updates to the rule and
the final implementation date.
If you have implemented changes already, we recommend businesses not
change any plans, pay structures, or policies that have been updated._
Question:
We have two currently salaried employees who make about $42,000 per
year. However, with commissions, we estimate that they will make $48,000
or more per year. They can still be exempt, right? What happens if their
commissions do not exceed the minimum of $47,476 as expected? We’ve
double checked the duties test and they both qualify as executives.
We’re just worried about the salary threshold.
Answer:
Great questions! This is definitely something employers with
commissioned employees will want to keep an eye on. You are correct that
if these employees make over $48,000, they can remain exempt. Up to 10%
of the minimum salary threshold – $4,747 – may come from
non-discretionary bonuses, commissions, or other incentive pay. Your
commissioned employees will therefore need to be paid a guaranteed base
salary of $42,729.
These incentive payments must be made on at least a quarterly basis, and
if the employee does not earn enough of the incentive pay to reach the
exempt salary threshold (pro-rated for the quarter, month, or whatever
period you’re using), the employer must pay the difference in order to
keep the employee’s exemption intact. The DOL calls these “catch-up
payments.”
Here’s how these catch-up payments work. Because the annual salary
threshold will be $47,476 and incentive pay must be made on a quarterly
basis, commissioned employees need to make at least 25% of that amount
(or $11,869) in base pay plus commission each quarter. If they make less
than that amount per quarter, you’ll need to make a catch-up payment to
cover the difference.
This payment must be made within one pay period and must only count
toward their income during the previous quarter. If you fail to make a
sufficient catch-up payment, the employee will be entitled to overtime
pay for any overtime hours worked during that quarter.
This content came from a team of HR professionals at HR Support Center.
Businesses like yours can pay a yearly fee for HR Support Center and
receive awesome subscription perks like these:
* Legal advice
* Employee handbook help (creating a new one or updating an existing
one)
* Custom HR forms, letters, tools, and other documents
* Tons of Q&A
* News on government activity that could affect you
* Training on common HR activities like hiring
* Thought leadership articles
The list goes on. HR Support Center is not only feature rich, it’s
inexpensive: one entire year of
HR Support Center is cheaper than one hour of a typical attorney’s
time.
Contact us today to sign up.

 Previous:
Next:
Stay up to date with the latest HR trends

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Employee satisfaction surveys are a great way to stay in tune with what your employees are thinking. Get real insights on how to engage and motivate your team.

        Article      
Read Time: 10 min
Employee burnout can impact work quality and morale. Discover the warning signs for burnout and how to prevent it in your workplace.

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Being an effective leader requires more than just technical knowledge. Create an environment where everyone can thrive and understand emotions in oneself and others.
HCM Software
HR + Payroll Software
Talent Management
Workforce Management
Employee Experience
Benefits Administration
Quick Links
Services + Support
855-565-3285
Talk to Sales
855-752-8564
© 2023 Paycor, Inc  |  Refer Paycor  |  Privacy Policy  |  1-800-501-9462 |
*Represents approximately 30,000 corporate clients covering 40,000 businesses employing people