Executive Summary of the BUILD Web Summit

Get a recap of the content presented in Paycor's Build Web Summit and access each recorded session here.

Employee Experience
Last Updated: June 17, 2019 | Read Time: 12 min
More than 10,000 HR professionals registered for Paycor’s two-day BUILD Web Summit! Industry experts offered insights on how to build a company no one wants to leave. If you missed the Summit, here’s a quick overview of each session.
In a hypercompetitive job market, the benefits you offer can help you recruit, engage and retain talent. Our speaker, Andrea Toben, says that building the right benefits package is one of the most important things you’ll do in the life of your business. Andrea advises companies to consider these non-traditional programs.
Watch the full webinar session, here.
“People don’t quit jobs, they quit managers.” At least that’s the conventional wisdom. Our keynote speaker, DisruptHR’s Jennifer McClure, says that in fact most people do quit their jobs, for reasons that leaders can control. Jennifer walked through the following survey and offered advice on how companies can build workplace cultures no one wants to leave.
Watch Jennifer McClure on demand as she breaks down these top reasons and gives you tips to combat turnover at your organization.
Paycor’s CHRO, Karen Crone says that when HR gets feedback right, they see an increase in employee engagement and productivity. In a feedback focused culture:
It doesn’t matter if feedback is positive or negative. Rather, the most important thing to remember is that when you collect feedback, you have to do something with it. Dig through the data, find insights, and show employees you’re both listening to and acting on what they share.
Want to implement some quick feedback strategies? Try these 5 tips:
There’s a lot more on this topic. Watch the on-demand webinar here.
Forty-three percent of employees are considered remote workers. HR consultant Sarah Laboranti talks about how remote work arrangements can help retain top talent, reduce expenses and boost engagement.
Why remote workplaces are so popular:
A recent two-year Stanford study found that remote workers:
“It shouldn’t matter where people are getting their work done – as long as they are focused and working hard each day”
Brian de Haaff
Co-founder and CEO, Aha!
For more on the benefits of remote work, check out the on demand webinar here.
Christine Ippolito says it’s time to rethink the way we compensate employees. Traditional merit reviews are gradually being replaced by new approaches. For example, “ratingless” systems represent an attempt to anchor compensation to objective data. Christine describes three new approaches:
If you want an action plan for creating a competitive compensation plan, check out the on demand webinar here.
Brace yourself… Burnout is officially a medical condition, according to the World Health Organization. Eugene Partridge puts it in perspective:
Source: Family Living Today
Here are the top 10 reasons for employee burnout and tips to remedy the symptoms:
For more advice on how you can overcome employee burnout watch the on demand webinar  here.
The landscape of compliance is shifting. For decades it was a minor inconvenience to small and medium-sized businesses but today it’s a serious threat to your bottom line and your brand image. When a question about salary history or prior convictions can land you in a court room, you need to be up-to-date with the latest in recruiting compliance. Attorney Katherine Weber advises HR leaders to ask these questions:
Katherine also covers questions around ADA compliance, compliant interview questions about prior convictions, salary history bans, background checks and many other important topics. Check out the on demand webinar here.
Shayna Royal makes a compelling case that internship programs can introduce your company to new ways of thinking and bring in people who can help with your social strategy (in addition to giving your team extra capacity and a strong candidate pipeline).
Shayna presents a detailed plan to start an internship program:
If you want a more in-depth breakdown of all 7 steps, watch the full webinar here.

 Previous:
Next:
Stay up to date with the latest HR trends

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Employee satisfaction surveys are a great way to stay in tune with what your employees are thinking. Get real insights on how to engage and motivate your team.

        Article      
Read Time: 10 min
Employee burnout can impact work quality and morale. Discover the warning signs for burnout and how to prevent it in your workplace.

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Being an effective leader requires more than just technical knowledge. Create an environment where everyone can thrive and understand emotions in oneself and others.
HCM Software
HR + Payroll Software
Talent Management
Workforce Management
Employee Experience
Benefits Administration
Quick Links
Services + Support
855-565-3285
Talk to Sales
855-752-8564
© 2023 Paycor, Inc  |  Refer Paycor  |  Privacy Policy  |  1-800-501-9462 |
*Represents approximately 30,000 corporate clients covering 40,000 businesses employing people