Government Approves Remote I-9 Review Due to COVID-19

The Department of Homeland Security (DHS) announced it would relax its standards for I-9 document verification amid the coronavirus outbreak.

Workforce Management
Last Updated:  December 8, 2020 | Read Time: 3 min
UPDATE December 3: On November 18, it was announced that this rule will be extended till the end of the 2020.
On Friday March 20, 2020, the Department of Homeland Security (DHS) announced it would relax its standards for I-9 document verification amid the coronavirus outbreak.
Employers with employees taking physical proximity precautions due to COVID-19 will not be required to review the employee’s identity and employment authorization documents in the employee’s physical presence. This provision only applies to employers and workplaces that are operating remotely. If there are employees physically present at a work location, no exceptions are being made at this time to review and verify documents in person.
Employers taking physical proximity precautions must inspect the physical documents remotely (over video link, fax, e-mail etc.) and obtain, inspect and retain copies of documents within 3 business days for the purpose of completing Section 2.
Once normal operations resume, employees must report to their employer within 3 business days for in-person verification of their identity and employment authorization documents. Once this physical inspection takes place, the employer should enter the following under additional information (in Section 2 or Section 3 as appropriate): COVID-19, documents physically examined and the date the documents were physically reviewed.
The United States Citizenship and Immigration Services (USCIS) has implemented the following polices to help minimize the burden on both employers and employees during the COVID-19 pandemic:
This provision will apply until the termination of the national emergency or until May 19, 2020, whichever comes first. Employers who exercise this option must provide documentation of their remote onboarding and telework policies for each employee. If newly hired employees are subject to COVID-19 quarantine or lockdown protocols, DHS will evaluate each matter on a case by case basis.
 Previous:
Next:
Stay up to date with the latest HR trends

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Employee satisfaction surveys are a great way to stay in tune with what your employees are thinking. Get real insights on how to engage and motivate your team.

        Article      
Read Time: 10 min
Employee burnout can impact work quality and morale. Discover the warning signs for burnout and how to prevent it in your workplace.

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Being an effective leader requires more than just technical knowledge. Create an environment where everyone can thrive and understand emotions in oneself and others.
HCM Software
HR + Payroll Software
Talent Management
Workforce Management
Employee Experience
Benefits Administration
Quick Links
Services + Support
855-565-3285
Talk to Sales
855-752-8564
© 2023 Paycor, Inc  |  Refer Paycor  |  Privacy Policy  |  1-800-501-9462 |
*Represents approximately 30,000 corporate clients covering 40,000 businesses employing people