Compensation Strategies for Manufacturers   Resource Center

Manufacturers must find great talent in an increasingly competitive market. You can use compensation strategy to recruit and retain talent.

Employee Experience
Last Updated:  May 8, 2014 | Read Time: 5 min
The challenge of recruiting top talent to the manufacturing industry has grown significantly in recent years, due to a skill and talent drain that began in 2011. Nations such as China and Mexico have promoted the education of skilled laborers, drawing businesses into their countries, as the U.S. education system has moved away from preparing workers for manufacturing jobs.
As a result, unemployment rates are very low in skilled roles, putting pressure on manufacturing businesses to find the best people—and keep them.
Carrie Schochet, director of the Overture Group and an organizational expert in HR staffing, and Bob Lindeman, managing director of the Overture Group, recently held a Paycor webinar in which they discussed how successful HR professionals are making compensation strategy a key part of employee recruitment and retention. Here are their insights.
Compensation is the second-largest expense for most manufacturers, so it’s critical to get it right. That means thinking broadly about compensation as more than just salary, but also:
Total compensation reports can help you understand the complete picture of what you offer. Also keep in mind that incentive programs should always be linked to company, team and individual performance, and your overall wage and salary program should be internally equitable and externally competitive.
Benefits are playing a larger role in candidates’ decision-making, and the discussion extends to more than the traditional questions. When you think about what benefits to offer, consider:
Flexible scheduling has become a major talking point in an increasingly mobile work world. Many employees who have children and/or a working partner might be as concerned about flexibility as they are about salary. When deciding which benefits to offer, make sure the package is in line with the needs of your employees, then link attractive benefits to recruitment and retention through a cost/benefit analysis.
Changes to healthcare legislation are growing only more complicated, making it more challenging for employers to choose insurance plans for their workers. Ultimately the decision relates to your overall compensation strategy, and employers must determine how much the company should pay for certain benefits vs. what the employee must pay. That ratio has changed significantly in recent years. A company that used to pay 85 percent of the cost now might pay 70 percent, and many companies have gone to tiered structures.
Effective HR teams think creatively about structuring a staff of full-time, part-time and temporary workers, taking into account how those statuses affect overall healthcare costs and build in opportunity for more flexible scheduling for employees.
Are your business’ HR practices optimized? Learn more from Bob and Carrie on strategic manufacturing HR by downloading their free Paycor webinar, 6 HR Functions that Drive Manufacturing Success.
Paycor’s HR technology solutions enable organizations to focus on strategy by simplifying administrative processes, with tools such as:
Want to learn more? 
 Previous:
Next:
Stay up to date with the latest HR trends

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Employee satisfaction surveys are a great way to stay in tune with what your employees are thinking. Get real insights on how to engage and motivate your team.

        Article      
Read Time: 10 min
Employee burnout can impact work quality and morale. Discover the warning signs for burnout and how to prevent it in your workplace.

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Being an effective leader requires more than just technical knowledge. Create an environment where everyone can thrive and understand emotions in oneself and others.
HCM Software
HR + Payroll Software
Talent Management
Workforce Management
Employee Experience
Benefits Administration
Quick Links
Services + Support
855-565-3285
Talk to Sales
855-752-8564
© 2023 Paycor, Inc  |  Refer Paycor  |  Privacy Policy  |  1-800-501-9462 |
*Represents approximately 30,000 corporate clients covering 40,000 businesses employing people