SaaS Payroll: 6 Tips to Find the Perfect Solution

If you're in the market for a SaaS payroll solution you need to know not all payroll software is created equal. Here's the selection criteria you need!

Workforce Management
Last Updated:  July 11, 2019 | Read Time: 5 min
Software as a Service (SaaS) is the term used for software that’s delivered and used totally online or in the cloud.
As more businesses turn to online solutions to manage their workflows, do accounting, etc., it should be no surprise to see that payroll processing is no exception. From tax-filing and employee self-service to data security and compliance management, SaaS payroll automates routine tasks and ensures accuracy, so business leaders can focus on what really matters, improving the bottom line.
If you’re in the market for payroll software online, you’ll need a sharp eye to find the perfect match for your organization. Keep in mind, not all payroll software is created equal. Whether you want to go with a bare-bones solution or you’re set on a more robust option, there are some functionality choices to consider.
Before you sign on the dotted line, make sure your payroll solution offers these features and functionalities.
 Previous:
Next:
Stay up to date with the latest HR trends

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Employee satisfaction surveys are a great way to stay in tune with what your employees are thinking. Get real insights on how to engage and motivate your team.

        Article      
Read Time: 10 min
Employee burnout can impact work quality and morale. Discover the warning signs for burnout and how to prevent it in your workplace.

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Being an effective leader requires more than just technical knowledge. Create an environment where everyone can thrive and understand emotions in oneself and others.
HCM Software
HR + Payroll Software
Talent Management
Workforce Management
Employee Experience
Benefits Administration
Quick Links
Services + Support
855-565-3285
Talk to Sales
855-752-8564
© 2023 Paycor, Inc  |  Refer Paycor  |  Privacy Policy  |  1-800-501-9462 |
*Represents approximately 30,000 corporate clients covering 40,000 businesses employing people