How to Introduce OKRs to Your Team in 3 Easy Steps

As a leader, your job doesn't end with selecting the OKR. Managers and department heads play a huge role in making OKRs successful. Get started, here.

Talent Management
Last Updated: May 25, 2021 | Read Time: 5 min
As a leader, your job doesn’t end with selecting the OKR methodology. Managers and department heads play a huge role in making the implementation of OKRs successful, and it’s your job to support them.
Any company that leads from the top will find manager buy-in to be extremely beneficial to the OKR roll-out process because it’s demonstrating by example. Your managers or department heads are the best people to run your annual objectives by. Task them with drafting alternative objectives that t the company, keeping in mind they have differing departmental priorities.
In the following, we’ll walk you through what a simple rollout process might look like as a guideline for you to start setting up OKRs for the very first time.
In this initial step, the leadership team should identify up to 5 company OKRs for the year and with that, narrow down OKRs for the next quarter.
If you aren’t too sure where these objectives should come from, most companies draw inspiration from their vision and mission statements as well as current challenges. For instance, these priorities can range from doubling in company revenue to only selling reusable products.
Upon drafting company objectives, management needs to determine what the measurable key results are for these objectives. Drawing from our previous example, if our objective is to “double company revenue”, a key result could be “hiring 5 new business development executives”. These key results will be your plan of action for accomplishing the overarching company objectives—thus completing the company’s first OKRs.
Communicate how your company OKRs will be cascaded using the alignment model of your choice with department heads and managers. This is the first step to rolling out OKRs to the rest of your company. Here are a few topics of discussion you may want to cover in your collaboration:
Managers benefit from stronger alignment and transparency as it helps them become better coaches. At the end of this collaboration, department heads and managers should have a clear understanding of what OKRs are and how they will be cascading throughout the company. They will be delegated with the task of creating department OKRs in accordance to company OKRs.
This initial introduction is key to gaining buy-in from employees. Managers need to be able to explain how this will benefit their team’s day-to-day and reduce micromanaging. With managers onboard with rolling out OKRs, an employee survey can be used to promote conversation with the rest of the company.
As with the department heads and managers, the same discussion points must be addressed along with questions and concerns. In order for OKRs to be rolled out successfully, employees must understand the expectations and alignment model to which your company will be approaching this roll out.
With Paycor Talent Development, we help leaders keep track of OKRs and goals in a simple, transparent platform that provides a visual representation of how your individual team and organizational objectives are connected. This helps align your workforce to your company’s top priorities and lets employees see where they’re making the biggest impact and achieving the goals you set each month/quarter/year. 
 Previous:
Next:
Stay up to date with the latest HR trends

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Employee satisfaction surveys are a great way to stay in tune with what your employees are thinking. Get real insights on how to engage and motivate your team.

        Article      
Read Time: 10 min
Employee burnout can impact work quality and morale. Discover the warning signs for burnout and how to prevent it in your workplace.

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Being an effective leader requires more than just technical knowledge. Create an environment where everyone can thrive and understand emotions in oneself and others.
HCM Software
HR + Payroll Software
Talent Management
Workforce Management
Employee Experience
Benefits Administration
Quick Links
Services + Support
855-565-3285
Talk to Sales
855-752-8564
© 2023 Paycor, Inc  |  Refer Paycor  |  Privacy Policy  |  1-800-501-9462 |
*Represents approximately 30,000 corporate clients covering 40,000 businesses employing people