4 Tips for Managing Vacation Requests

Employers must balance employee vacation requests with ensuring work gets done. Here are 4 tips for managing employee vacation requests.

Employee Experience
Last Updated:  June 3, 2014 | Read Time: 3 min
From the HR Pros of the HR Support
Center
It is often difficult to strike that perfect balance between allowing
employees some degree of flexibility to take vacations, while ensuring
adequate coverage in the workplace. Employers also find it difficult
to juggle multiple vacation requests around popular vacation times.
Below we have listed four tips to ensure the vacation plan works well
for both the employer and its employees.
If your business is highly seasonal in nature, you may wish to enact a
policy requiring employees to use all or a specific amount of vacation
during the slow months. For example, if your workflow significantly
decreases in the first quarter of the year, you may consider stating in
your vacation policy that employees are required to use at least half of
their annual vacation allotment during this time period. The same holds
true for limiting or prohibiting the use of paid vacation during
traditionally busy seasons.
It is also suggested to consider ahead of time the procedure to
determine which employee(s) will be granted time off when multiple
vacation requests are submitted for the same dates. Some methods
employers incorporate to make these difficult decisions are approving
vacation leave on a “first come, first served” basis or using seniority
as the deciding factor.
Employers are permitted to designate vacation time based on the needs
of the organization. Employers that close for certain weeks during the
year often use this method of vacation management. For example, if the
company closes for the week between Christmas Day and New Year’s Day,
the company may require all employees to save five days of vacation time
to use during this period.
With respect to notification of vacation time requests, many employers
request a specific amount of time, such as a minimum of two weeks’
notice of submission for time off from work. Other employers prefer to
plan vacations on a yearly basis and ask employees to submit all
vacation requests for the calendar year in January.
Whatever methods the organization applies for handling vacation
requests, we recommend that the management team clearly communicates the
company’s policy and reasoning behind it to employees so they may plan
their vacations accordingly. Clear communication and consistent
application of the vacation policy are crucial to avoid potential
morale problems or discrimination charges based on the administration of
the organization’s vacation policy.
Want more helpful answers to your HR questions?
Subscribe to Paycor’s HR Support
Center
and find more HR resources and guides. Or, upgrade to HR On Demand to
get personalized answers and advice from an HR professional. Contact
us to learn more.
 Previous:
Next:
Stay up to date with the latest HR trends

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Employee satisfaction surveys are a great way to stay in tune with what your employees are thinking. Get real insights on how to engage and motivate your team.

        Article      
Read Time: 10 min
Employee burnout can impact work quality and morale. Discover the warning signs for burnout and how to prevent it in your workplace.

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Being an effective leader requires more than just technical knowledge. Create an environment where everyone can thrive and understand emotions in oneself and others.
HCM Software
HR + Payroll Software
Talent Management
Workforce Management
Employee Experience
Benefits Administration
Quick Links
Services + Support
855-565-3285
Talk to Sales
855-752-8564
© 2023 Paycor, Inc  |  Refer Paycor  |  Privacy Policy  |  1-800-501-9462 |
*Represents approximately 30,000 corporate clients covering 40,000 businesses employing people