How to Classify Independent Contractors vs. Employees

The classification of independent contractors and employees has tax implications as well as control. Learn the differences here.

Employee Experience
Last Updated:  December 2, 2020 | Read Time: 6 min
In 2020, we went from a booming economy to record-breaking unemployment—HR leaders has a year unlike any other. In 2021, as the economy bounces back, it’s likely that more and more businesses with partner with independent contractors. It’s essential that these workers are properly classified.
One thing you definitely can’t ignore: In 2021, pay to independent contractors will be reported using a revamped 1099-NEC (that stands for Non-Employee Compensation).
Aside from taxes, the biggest difference between employees and contractors is the level of control the employer has over the worker.
Typically, an employer that partners with an independent contractor defines the scope of work but doesn’t have control over how, where or when the work is completed. Because the independent contractor often uses their own tools and equipment, expenses aren’t usually reimbursed.
Independent contractors are just that… independent. They’re either paid by the project or by the hour, they set their own schedules, they can work offsite, and unlike employees, their work usually isn’t key to the success of the business.
The IRS considers three categories when classifying independent contractors:
When determining the classification of an employee, keep this IRS quote in mind:
“There is no ‘magic’ or set number of factors that ‘makes’ the worker an employee or an independent contractor, and no one factor stands alone in making this determination. Also, factors that are relevant in one situation may not be relevant in another”.
However, if the DOL determines misclassification was intentional, an employer may be responsible for:

Monetary fines aren’t the only challenge you’ll have to overcome. Fines and class action lawsuits can significantly tarnish your brand image, making it harder to recruit top talent, retain clients and grow. Together, these penalties can threaten the survival of any small to medium-sized business.
Keep in mind: The IRS will assist you in determining the classification of a worker. All you need to do is file Form SS-8. Until the IRS makes a decision, you should treat the worker as an employee. 

Here’s a puzzle: What if you employ a full-time worker and they also do the occasional contracted work for your business on the side? Can you pay this worker as both a W-2 employee and as an independent contractor?
The safest bet would be to classify and pay this worker entirely as an employee for all the tasks they perform. However, if the employee has an established outside business, and the contracted work doesn’t pertain to this employee’s duties, then you may treat the employee as an independent contractor for that specific work.
For example, if you have an employee who works as a bookkeeper but also has a side photography business, you may be able to hire them as an independent contractor for a photoshoot while paying them as an employee for their normal duties as a bookkeeper.
We’re proud to keep more than 30,000 organizations up-to-date and compliant with federal and state employment laws. Interested in learning more? Consult with a Paycor representative.
*This content is for informational and educational purposes only and is not intended to be taken as legal advice. For legal advice, consult with your professional legal or tax advisor.

 Previous:
Next:
Stay up to date with the latest HR trends

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Employee satisfaction surveys are a great way to stay in tune with what your employees are thinking. Get real insights on how to engage and motivate your team.

        Article      
Read Time: 10 min
Employee burnout can impact work quality and morale. Discover the warning signs for burnout and how to prevent it in your workplace.

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Being an effective leader requires more than just technical knowledge. Create an environment where everyone can thrive and understand emotions in oneself and others.
HCM Software
HR + Payroll Software
Talent Management
Workforce Management
Employee Experience
Benefits Administration
Quick Links
Services + Support
855-565-3285
Talk to Sales
855-752-8564
© 2023 Paycor, Inc  |  Refer Paycor  |  Privacy Policy  |  1-800-501-9462 |
*Represents approximately 30,000 corporate clients covering 40,000 businesses employing people