What Are Online Recruitment CRM Platforms?

Recruiting talent is a multi-step process with a lot of moving parts. Learn how an online recruitment software, CRM, can help make the process easier.

Talent Management
Last Updated:  March 25, 2020 | Read Time: 5 min
A recruitment CRM (candidate relationship management) system is a tool that allows hiring professionals to build and maintain relationships with job candidates while simultaneously managing the entire recruitment process.
The idea behind a recruitment CRM is treating candidates as if they were customers. In fact, the acronym CRM originally stood for “customer relationship management,” and the first CRM systems were focused on driving sales and retaining customers (think Siebel, Oracle, and now, Salesforce).
In recent years, however, Recruiting and HR departments have realized the need for online recruitment software of their own. With the rise of the modern job seeker and increased competition in the job market, leading employers realized that manually managing candidates via, paper, pen, email, and spreadsheets would no longer do. They needed a better way to attract top talent, engage with them, and drive them through the various stages of the hiring process.
The first applicant tracking systems came to the market as static systems of record where candidate information was merely stored as a digital rolodex. However, as new technology has come to the market, Applicant Tracking Systems (ATS) have grown into full-blown CRMs for recruiting. Now fully-equipped with built-in workflows and automations, a modern ATS, or recruitment CRM, allows users to manage every aspect of the candidate relationship, from initial sourcing through to the job offer stage.
The differences between an applicant tracking system (ATS) and a recruitment CRM are largely fabricated through aggressive marketing campaigns over the years. In reality, a recruitment CRM is an an applicant tracking system and vice versa. Recently, as new sourcing tools have come to market, they have began referring to themselves exclusively as recruitment CRMs. Unfortunately, this is misleading because they often lack the recruiting workflows needed to manage candidate relationships beyond initial sourcing and outreach.
So how do you know if you need a recruitment CRM? What features should you be looking for? A good starting place is to review the 13 symptoms of ineffective hiring. If you are suffering from any of these, it is definitely time to start considering an ATS as your CRM system for online recruiting.
Realistically though, if you are involved in hiring at your organization in any way (whether it be as an HR professional, a Recruiter, or a Hiring Manager), you should be considering a recruitment CRM system at your company.
…Literally control and manage your entire recruiting process, all from one place.
For a more comprehensive list, review the 13 signs of inefficient recruiting here. If your team is suffering from any of these symptoms, you may be wasting extensive time and money. Calculate how much you can save with a Recruitment CRM.
True recruitment CRMs are loaded with features that help you recruit and hire top talent. Below are the most critical ones that you should be looking for:
Finding, interviewing and hiring talented people are the most important challenges growing businesses face. Paycor Recruiting is a software solution designed and built by recruiters for recruiters and HR hiring teams to help you solve your hiring problems and optimize your recruiting process.

 Previous:
Next:
Stay up to date with the latest HR trends

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Employee satisfaction surveys are a great way to stay in tune with what your employees are thinking. Get real insights on how to engage and motivate your team.

        Article      
Read Time: 10 min
Employee burnout can impact work quality and morale. Discover the warning signs for burnout and how to prevent it in your workplace.

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Being an effective leader requires more than just technical knowledge. Create an environment where everyone can thrive and understand emotions in oneself and others.
HCM Software
HR + Payroll Software
Talent Management
Workforce Management
Employee Experience
Benefits Administration
Quick Links
Services + Support
855-565-3285
Talk to Sales
855-752-8564
© 2023 Paycor, Inc  |  Refer Paycor  |  Privacy Policy  |  1-800-501-9462 |
*Represents approximately 30,000 corporate clients covering 40,000 businesses employing people