What Happens if I Incorrectly Pay Employees?

Accurately paying employees should be easy, but it's a serious challenge for many businesses. See what to do if underpayments or overpayments occur.

Workforce Management
Last Updated:  January 28, 2020 | Read Time: 5 min
Overpaying or underpaying employees seems like an easy problem to avoid. But it’s a serious challenge that plagues small and medium-sized businesses alike. In 2019 alone, the DOL collected a record $322 million in back wages for employees. With more crackdown and higher penalties, businesses need to be more prepared than ever before.
Keep in mind the DOL won’t be your only headache. Employee satisfaction, brand reputation and your bottom line are all at risk. To help, here’s everything you need to know should you ever incorrectly pay an employee.
Let’s start with the basics: According to the Fair Labor Standards Act (FLSA), employers that make a one-time overpayment to an employee can recoup the overpayment by deducting that amount from the employee’s next paycheck. (Keep in mind state regulations can differ.) But don’t go rogue. Keep your employees informed by following these 4 steps:
Deducting money from an employee’s paycheck can be awkward. To help, here’s a templated email we created to make your life easier. DISCLAIMER: This is NOT intended to be legal advice.


Hello [NAME],
In a recent audit, we discovered that we accidently overpaid you by [$ AMOUNT] on [DATE]. To remedy the situation, we’ll need to deduct [$ AMOUNT] from your next paycheck on [DATE].
If this deduction will cause a financial burden, please let me know. We can do [#OF INSTALLMENTS] smaller deductions over [#OF PAY PERIODS] pay periods.
Thank you for your patience and understanding,
[YOUR CONTACT INFORMATION]
Underpayments happen for many reasons, but none more than human error. If you’re lucky and you’ve found the error before the Wage & Hour division, here’s what you should do.
Keep in mind, the statute of limitations on underpayment is two years or three in the event that the underpayment was deliberate.

Because the number one reason for overpayment or underpayment is human error, you should consider automating your payroll process if you haven’t already. You should also remain up-to-date with best practices by subscribing to email newsletters of government departments like the DOL and Wage & Hour division.
Paycor’s Perfected Payroll Solution
We spent more than 20 years perfecting the payroll process. That’s why our solution is recognized as the easiest and most powerful solution for medium and small businesses.
With Paycor Payroll, you can ensure your employees are always paid accurately and on-time. But that’s just the tip of the iceberg.
 Previous:
Next:
Stay up to date with the latest HR trends

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Employee satisfaction surveys are a great way to stay in tune with what your employees are thinking. Get real insights on how to engage and motivate your team.

        Article      
Read Time: 10 min
Employee burnout can impact work quality and morale. Discover the warning signs for burnout and how to prevent it in your workplace.

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Being an effective leader requires more than just technical knowledge. Create an environment where everyone can thrive and understand emotions in oneself and others.
HCM Software
HR + Payroll Software
Talent Management
Workforce Management
Employee Experience
Benefits Administration
Quick Links
Services + Support
855-565-3285
Talk to Sales
855-752-8564
© 2023 Paycor, Inc  |  Refer Paycor  |  Privacy Policy  |  1-800-501-9462 |
*Represents approximately 30,000 corporate clients covering 40,000 businesses employing people