Barriers to Entrepreneurship: Tackle Them with Technology

Learn how to tackle the barriers standing in the way of your small business' success using these tips.

Workforce Management
Last Updated:  February 15, 2016 | Read Time: 3 min
Entrepreneurs have made a major impact on the US economy, even during
trying times. Since 1990, as big business eliminated 4 million jobs,
small businesses created 8 million new jobs. And the number of small
businesses has increased 49 percent since 1982.
America has been downsizing, and start-ups have stepped into that vacant
space in the economy.
Yet, according to Forbes magazine, eight of 10 entrepreneurs fail in
the first 18 months. Why such a grim statistic? Consider these new
realities for business owners:
It’s not just something that happens every century anymore. It’s
happening every day. Entrepreneurs must be poised and ready to meet
the next challenge or dream up the Next Big Thing.
There’s more competition for goods and services, as well as for top
talent. Not only that, but economic markets are so closely intertwined
that a blip 5,000 miles away can have a ripple effect on your business.
No longer do board members and shareholders have all the control. In
this hyper-connected age, employees and consumers often can—and
should—drive corporate decision-making.
Environmental, economic, technological and political changes
constitute threats but also opportunities for entrepreneurs, especially
those who know how to bolster the bottom line while helping people in
the process.
Staying on top of such frequent, large-scale change is no easy task for
entrepreneurs, who commonly wear more hats at work than they have time
to count!
Successful business owners build resilient organizations that have
backups in place well beyond Plan B and employ future-oriented systems
that can change as business needs demand. That’s where technology comes
in.
Entrepreneurs can use technology to:
* Focus on strategy
* Improve efficiency
* Mitigate compliance risk
* Increase employee satisfaction and engagement
Tech can form the foundation you need to step back and think big,
developing the right strategy to power your growth. But how do you get
started?
Download the free whitepaper,
Entrepreneur’s Guide: 4 Ways to Use Technology to Grow
Your Business to learn how to overcome the barriers standing in the
way of your business.
Sources: U.S. Small Business Association, Forbes
 Previous:
Next:
Stay up to date with the latest HR trends

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Employee satisfaction surveys are a great way to stay in tune with what your employees are thinking. Get real insights on how to engage and motivate your team.

        Article      
Read Time: 10 min
Employee burnout can impact work quality and morale. Discover the warning signs for burnout and how to prevent it in your workplace.

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Being an effective leader requires more than just technical knowledge. Create an environment where everyone can thrive and understand emotions in oneself and others.
HCM Software
HR + Payroll Software
Talent Management
Workforce Management
Employee Experience
Benefits Administration
Quick Links
Services + Support
855-565-3285
Talk to Sales
855-752-8564
© 2023 Paycor, Inc  |  Refer Paycor  |  Privacy Policy  |  1-800-501-9462 |
*Represents approximately 30,000 corporate clients covering 40,000 businesses employing people