How Manufacturers Can Both Reduce Labor Costs and Add Value for Employees

Check out our latest blog post and learn how manufacturers can both reduce labor costs and add value for employees with the right HCM solution.

Workforce Management
Last Updated:  August 4, 2020 | Read Time: 3 min
Your workforce is one of your largest expenses. It’s also your greatest risk. To be competitive, manufacturers need to be agile, responsive, and understand how to maximize their talent. Cutting-edge manufacturers are adding value to their employees by providing a workplace where they can grow and develop. They’re also wisely allocating labor costs to the projects and shifts that will maximize efficiency.
Labor costs are the largest item on your balance sheet, so an effective cost-reduction plan should balance resources and cost control. While a reduction in force is typically the go-to action when discussing cost-cutting, it’s often not the best way. Replacing employees can be very costly, and lost institutional knowledge can take years to recover. It makes more sense to keep your employees and make sure they’re engaged and motivated. But how does that idea gel with cutting costs?
Here are a few methods to think about if you’re looking to reduce cost:
Overtime and overscheduling are the largest contributors to out-of-control labor costs. If you’re uncertain about your company’s production demands, your scheduling is haphazard at best. Without clear oversight, you could be unnecessarily staffing the business at non-peak times or needlessly paying overtime. Making sure the business is appropriately staffed to meet demand can eliminate unnecessary labor and overtime hours.
Workers who are well trained have improved productivity and a lower chance of errors and workplace accidents. By creating a formal training program, you can help employees stay engaged and motivated, which means they’re more likely to stick with the company.
Temporary or part-time workers can be called in at peak production times on an as-needed basis. When you use part-time labor, you’re off the hook when it comes to paying for the benefits, 401(k) contributions, and bonuses that your full-time employees receive. If you hire workers through a staffing agency, you’re also not responsible for paying payroll taxes.
Your employees are extremely valuable business assets, so make sure you’re providing them with a safe work environment. By implementing well-documented safety protocols, you can reduce the chance of accidents, which can, in turn, reduce costly Workers’ Compensation claims and paid time off work.
Labor costs are a significant portion of the budget for any company. Making smart decisions such as gaining deeper insight into scheduling and doing everything you can to help ensure employee satisfaction can go a long way to reducing your expenditures.

 Previous:
Next:
Stay up to date with the latest HR trends

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Employee satisfaction surveys are a great way to stay in tune with what your employees are thinking. Get real insights on how to engage and motivate your team.

        Article      
Read Time: 10 min
Employee burnout can impact work quality and morale. Discover the warning signs for burnout and how to prevent it in your workplace.

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Being an effective leader requires more than just technical knowledge. Create an environment where everyone can thrive and understand emotions in oneself and others.
HCM Software
HR + Payroll Software
Talent Management
Workforce Management
Employee Experience
Benefits Administration
Quick Links
Services + Support
855-565-3285
Talk to Sales
855-752-8564
© 2023 Paycor, Inc  |  Refer Paycor  |  Privacy Policy  |  1-800-501-9462 |
*Represents approximately 30,000 corporate clients covering 40,000 businesses employing people