6 Steps to Create a Reverse Mentoring Program

Reverse mentoring can be beneficial to all generation that make up today’s workforce. Read Paycor's article on how you can create a program at your company.

Employee Experience
Last Updated: October 29, 2021 | Read Time: 6 min
Reverse mentoring isn’t just the latest buzzword. The concept has been around for a while, arguably starting back in 1999 when the World Wide Web was still in its infancy for most companies (and still called the World Wide Web). That’s when Jack Welch, former CEO of GE, required 500 of his top executives to partner with their younger employees to learn the ins and outs of this newfangled internet thing. While some of the execs bristled at the thought of being trained by such young coworkers, the program was a success and helped bridge a generational divide.
Millennials make up more than a third of the U.S. labor force, and Generation Z (people born between 1996 and 2015) is now entering the workforce, but a lot of Baby Boomers (1946–1965) aren’t yet ready for retirement. This jumble of generations is creating an interesting scenario for businesses when it comes to institutional skills and abilities.
Many Millennials and all of Gen Z are known as Digital Natives because they’ve never lived in a world without computers and the internet. Digital Natives are extremely comfortable with technology and consider it to be an essential part of their lives; most of them are early adopters of the latest and greatest app or device.
Many Boomers, on the other hand, are hesitant to adopt the latest technology and might struggle with adapting to new software. This resistance can also become a mindset and seep into the adoption other facets of a rapidly changing, multi-generational and diverse workplace.      
Initially, mentees and mentors might be unsure of a reverse mentoring program’s intent. Senior executives being mentored by an employee 30 years their junior could get the impression that the company is trying to push the older generation out of the workforce and into retirement. At the same time, mentors could feel that the senior executives might not take them seriously and view them as kids. Addressing and overcoming those two concerns enables a reverse mentoring program to work and foster a stronger workplace culture.
Below, we outline six steps that will help you create a reverse mentoring program for your company.
Of course, this list is just a basic start. To effectively build a reverse mentoring program it must be supported by leadership and company culture. If you already have a mentoring program in place, you’re 75% there. If you don’t have one, it’s worth considering the value one can bring to bridge the generational gaps that can undermine your teams and hinder your company’s ability to innovate.
For more free resources and tools that promote DE&I best practices in the workplace, visit Perspectives+. It’s Paycor’s online knowledge library designed to help our partner network drive change, empower colleagues, and foster new leaders.
 Previous:
Next:
Stay up to date with the latest HR trends

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Employee satisfaction surveys are a great way to stay in tune with what your employees are thinking. Get real insights on how to engage and motivate your team.

        Article      
Read Time: 10 min
Employee burnout can impact work quality and morale. Discover the warning signs for burnout and how to prevent it in your workplace.

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Being an effective leader requires more than just technical knowledge. Create an environment where everyone can thrive and understand emotions in oneself and others.
HCM Software
HR + Payroll Software
Talent Management
Workforce Management
Employee Experience
Benefits Administration
Quick Links
Services + Support
855-565-3285
Talk to Sales
855-752-8564
© 2023 Paycor, Inc  |  Refer Paycor  |  Privacy Policy  |  1-800-501-9462 |
*Represents approximately 30,000 corporate clients covering 40,000 businesses employing people