How (the Wrong) HR Technology Makes Open Enrollment Harder

Health insurance brokers need to keep their client's best interests in mind. See how to advise clients on HR technology for open enrollment..

Benefits Administration
Last Updated:  July 25, 2019 | Read Time: 8 min
Capterra, an online software review site, features 300 ben admin systems as of 2019, and only 7 providers with more than 300 reviews are rated 4.5 stars or higher. (Not to brag, but Paycor’s benefits technology is one of those seven.) That means there’s a lot of bad technology out there.
But don’t take our word for it. Here’s what a Capterra user had to say about a well-known benefits administration provider:
“Our provider failed to execute open enrollment, so employees were not enrolled with the new health insurance provider for weeks into the new year. They failed to cancel our old health insurance, so we were doubled billed. Overall, it seems like this product was designed to trip up customers and make it difficult to cancel.”– Arron S., Director of Finance, Capterra User
See what’s going on there? This client is frustrated by both bad technology and bad service (the two often go hand in hand). As a trusted broker and expert advisor, here’s how you can protect your clients from a frustrating experience.
Start by understanding how bad technology makes open enrollment harder for your clients:
Help your clients make the right choice.
Choosing the wrong provider could lock you and your clients into a system that you’re going to have to work around, not work with. Your clients depend on you to help them find the right HR technology. Here’s what you can do.
Your clients need a unified HCM system that lets them enter data once and then makes it available across all HR and payroll solutions vs. siloed products that don’t integrate with one another.
 Store employee files in a cloud-based system to ensure security and efficiency. By adopting electronic storage your clients mitigate risk should they be audited.
 Employees need to access and enroll in benefits anytime, anywhere. When major life events or demographic changes occur, they should be able to make the changes on their own, giving your clients more time to focus on strategic initiatives.
 Maintain control of the system without being too rigid; enables employees to make changes.
Once you help them narrow the list of potential partners, they’ll need to meet with a representative. Your job is to help them lift the hood. In other words, don’t let them get fooled by flashy demos, help them come prepared with questions that will ensure they’re getting the right human resources technology and expertise.
Everyone’s afraid of implementation, and for good reason. According to SHRM, 70% of HR systems implementations are not successful.
 Understand who will be assisting you and how that process will work. If your sales rep is also leading implementation, they may be more focused on selling rather than a successful implementation.
 It’s important that everyone is working towards the same go live date. Your client’s provider should layout a timeline from sign to start.
NOTE: Your client’s start date is dependent on their involvement with the provider. If your clients aren’t responsive during implementation, the process will get derailed.
 Communication is the key to a successful implementation. The provider should set expectations for your clients on what they’ll need to bring to the table (e.g. what information/data will they need to provide). Look for weekly implementation calls to review progress and ensure the process is running smoothly. Overcommunicating isn’t a bad idea.
 The provider should lay out the full costs of implementation. From upfront to your go live date, there should be no surprises or hidden fees.
You don’t want to be surprised during implementation. Make sure you have a clear picture of what can be handled in the system and any potential workarounds. Ensure they can support your policies like PTO, paternity leave and the unique needs of your client’s business.
More than 30,000 medium and small businesses nationwide trust Paycor to help them engage, manage and develop their people. Paycor is known for delivering the best unified Human Capital Management (HCM) platform for the SMB market, but what makes us legendary is the total client experience we provide, from responsive service and user-friendly design to expert partnership and thought leadership. Our unique combination of technology and expertise helps clients streamline every aspect of people management, so they can focus on what they know best – their business and their mission.
Want to learn more? Visit our benefits administration page.
 Previous:
Next:
Stay up to date with the latest HR trends

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Employee satisfaction surveys are a great way to stay in tune with what your employees are thinking. Get real insights on how to engage and motivate your team.

        Article      
Read Time: 10 min
Employee burnout can impact work quality and morale. Discover the warning signs for burnout and how to prevent it in your workplace.

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Being an effective leader requires more than just technical knowledge. Create an environment where everyone can thrive and understand emotions in oneself and others.
HCM Software
HR + Payroll Software
Talent Management
Workforce Management
Employee Experience
Benefits Administration
Quick Links
Services + Support
855-565-3285
Talk to Sales
855-752-8564
© 2023 Paycor, Inc  |  Refer Paycor  |  Privacy Policy  |  1-800-501-9462 |
*Represents approximately 30,000 corporate clients covering 40,000 businesses employing people