The 5 C’s of New Hire Onboarding

Onboarding new hires, or transitioning current employees into a new role? Get expert onboarding advice.

Employee Experience
Last Updated:  September 26, 2014 | Read Time: 6 min
The best way to ensure employee satisfaction is to get new hires off
to a good start through a successful and welcoming onboarding
experience. Paycor organizational development specialist Allison Flynn
explains the “5 C’s of Onboarding” that proactive organizations should
make part of their new-hire process.
Compliance is the baseline understanding of your organization’s
policies and procedures. This is the lowest level of an employee’s
integration into your organization and is typically covered during a
formal orientation with HR. Compliance can be seen as the “boring HR”
part of orientation but is something every onboarding program should
cover. Some topics to consider include company policies, safety
regulations, confidentiality requirements, harassment prevention and
departmental procedures.
Focus on clarifying the new associate’s role and performance
expectations. How does his/her role fit into organizational and team
goals? What are his/her individual goals? What does your organization
do, and how does it operate? These are all questions new associates have
when they enter a new company, and covering this as a part of your
onboarding process can help new hires get up to speed much more
quickly than having them find out on their own.
New associates start becoming exposed to your company’s culture as soon
as they visit your website or step into the office for an interview.
You should immerse new associates into your organization’s culture
throughout the onboarding program. Make sure they are very familiar
with your organization’s mission, vision and values; company history,
and the way associates communicate with one another.
Managers should encourage each new associate to establish interpersonal
relationships and information networks within your organization.
Ensure that new hires are aware of and connect with subgroups within
your company. For example, Paycor has a Young Professional
organization and a community service group; a representative from these
groups comes to each of our orientation classes to connect with the new
hires. Also consider assigning a mentor or guide for each new
associate to help him or her navigate through the first few months on
the job.
Collect feedback to continuously improve your organization’s onboarding
program. Managers should formally check in with new associates during
their first 30, 60 and 90 days.
Some of these concepts are covered by your HR department, some by the
hiring manager and some by a peer. Though some of the topics can be
covered during a formal orientation, many of the focus areas should be
reinforced throughout the first 90 days and beyond.
To learn more about onboarding, you can *view Allison’s entire webinar,
Onboarding: Creating a Memorable
Start
or *download The First 90 Days Onboarding
Checklist
for a step-by-step guide.
And for more onboarding best practices, *watch a 2-minute demo of
Paycor’s Onboarding
solution to learn how to
streamline new hire onboarding into a painless, paperless process.
Source: HR Specialist (Vol. 9 Issue 9)
 Previous:
Next:
Stay up to date with the latest HR trends

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Employee satisfaction surveys are a great way to stay in tune with what your employees are thinking. Get real insights on how to engage and motivate your team.

        Article      
Read Time: 10 min
Employee burnout can impact work quality and morale. Discover the warning signs for burnout and how to prevent it in your workplace.

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Being an effective leader requires more than just technical knowledge. Create an environment where everyone can thrive and understand emotions in oneself and others.
HCM Software
HR + Payroll Software
Talent Management
Workforce Management
Employee Experience
Benefits Administration
Quick Links
Services + Support
855-565-3285
Talk to Sales
855-752-8564
© 2023 Paycor, Inc  |  Refer Paycor  |  Privacy Policy  |  1-800-501-9462 |
*Represents approximately 30,000 corporate clients covering 40,000 businesses employing people