Tuition Reimbursement Program Options for Small Businesses

Offering a tuition reimbursement program to your employees is key to a successful benefits strategy. Dive into the options here.

Benefits Administration
Last Updated: February 8, 2021 | Read Time: 5 min
An employee tuition reimbursement or assistance program isn’t just “nice to have”, it’s one of the building blocks of a successful benefits strategy, helping you attract, retain and develop top talent. More than half of employers operate some kind of tuition assistance program, according to a recent SHRM survey. Don’t think this only applies to big businesses—there are options for those operating on smaller budgets too.
When funding employee education programs, employers have too options. First, tuition assistance: providing funds up-front and without conditions. Alternatively, businesses can offer tuition reimbursement, i.e., only releasing funds when recipients hit certain goals, like completing their class or achieving a certain grade.
Modern education comes in many different forms. Employees don’t necessarily have to attend a brick-and-mortar university or night school. Online courses and certifications offer a quicker, cost-effective alternative. Small businesses can further cut costs by negotiating bulk discounts when multiple employees take the same course.
Let’s consider a few of the reasons tuition reimbursement programs can be such a useful tool for small businesses.
The history of HR is all about companies realizing employees are after more than just a paycheck. They want work they care about, and employers who care about them. Incentivizing continuing education shows a commitment to your people and, in doing so, wins increased commitment from them.
In the long term, a successful tuition reimbursement program pays for itself. Here’s why: by supporting employees’ education, you win their loyalty. Cutting down on voluntary separations is a big boost for the balance sheet, considering it costs an average of $4,129 to replace just one employee—and even then there’s a chance a new hire won’t be a good fit, and you’ll have to replace them too.
When hiring is expensive, your best bet is to double down on your current workforce. Tuition reimbursement isn’t just a benefit to employees. Whatever skills and experience an employee gains, they bring back to their company and share with their colleagues. A more educated team means higher productivity, boosting your bottom line.
Thanks to Section 127 of the IRS tax code, tuition assistance is tax-exempt up to $5,250 per employee per year. It’s not just tuition: any books or supplies necessary to the complete the course also count as qualifying expenses. To take advantage, you’ll have to set up a Qualified Education Assistance Plan, open document the process in writing and make the program available to all employees.
Reimbursing tuition is all about helping employees reach their potential. You should consider, though, whether you have jobs and opportunities available for better educated employees. If you’re educating employees beyond what you require of them, they might not be satisfied staying in their current role.
But think of it this way, as the old joke goes: don’t worry about what happens if you train employees and they leave; worry about what happens if you don’t train them and they stay.
It’s crucial to set up your tuition reimbursement program in the right way. Your first job is to make sure it complies with IRS Section 127 regulations (for that, it’s best to consult a financial advisor). Here are some other questions you’ll have to ask yourself when creating the program:
Paycor’s all-in-one solution helps your organization improve efficiency, reduce compliance concerns, and regain the time you need to focus on what matters most—your people.
 Previous:
Next:
Stay up to date with the latest HR trends

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Employee satisfaction surveys are a great way to stay in tune with what your employees are thinking. Get real insights on how to engage and motivate your team.

        Article      
Read Time: 10 min
Employee burnout can impact work quality and morale. Discover the warning signs for burnout and how to prevent it in your workplace.

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Being an effective leader requires more than just technical knowledge. Create an environment where everyone can thrive and understand emotions in oneself and others.
HCM Software
HR + Payroll Software
Talent Management
Workforce Management
Employee Experience
Benefits Administration
Quick Links
Services + Support
855-565-3285
Talk to Sales
855-752-8564
© 2023 Paycor, Inc  |  Refer Paycor  |  Privacy Policy  |  1-800-501-9462 |
*Represents approximately 30,000 corporate clients covering 40,000 businesses employing people