What is a Taxpayer ID Number?

How do you get a taxpayer ID number? Get an EIN for your business.

Workforce Management
Last Updated:  February 28, 2013 | Read Time: 6 min
Just as the need to file taxes is universal, all individuals and most
businesses are required to have identification numbers in order to file
those taxes. Known as an Employer Identification Number or EIN, a
taxpayer ID number is used to identify a business for tax purposes, and
is similar to a Social Security number.
However, not all businesses are required to have taxpayer ID numbers.
For example, sole proprietorships represent one type of business that
can go without obtaining one. But other formal and informal
organizations–such as homes with non-resident household employees,
owners of Keogh
plans and
even nonprofit organizations–do require a unique tax identification
number.
You need to apply for a taxpayer ID number if you answer “Yes” to any of
the following questions:
* Do you have employees?
* Do you operate your business as a corporation or a partnership?
* Do you file any of these tax returns: Employment, Excise, or Alcohol,
Tobacco and Firearms?
* Do you withhold taxes on income, other than wages, paid to a
non-resident alien?
* Do you have a Keogh plan?
* Are you involved with any type of trust organizations, except certain
grantor-owned revocable trusts, IRAs, Exempt Organization Business
Income Tax Returns?
* Are you involved with any type of Estates?
* Are you involved with any type of Real Estate Mortgage Investment
Conduit?
* Are you involved with any type of Non-profit organization?
* Are you involved with any type of Farmers’ Cooperative?
* Are you involved as any type of a Plan Administrator?
The IRS page How to Apply for an
EIN
identifies four means of applying for an EIN. Be aware that some
Internet businesses offer taxpayer ID or EINs for a small charge.
However, please note that these ID numbers are provided to applicants
free of charge by the IRS through a simple process.
Online
The online taxpayer ID number
application is
simple to complete and an EIN is issued during the session as soon as
the application information is validated. Online application is intended
for businesses or entities with principal operation or residence in the
U.S .or U.S territories. According to the IRS, the principal officer,
owner, trustor, general partner, grantor, etc. must have a valid
Taxpayer Identification Number (Social Security Number, Employer
Identification Number, or Individual Taxpayer Identification Number) to
be able to use the online application. (Special note: As of May 21,
2012, taxpayer ID numbers have been limited to one application per day
per responsible party through all application channels.)
By telephone
Tax ID numbers can be obtained by calling the Business and Specialty Tax
Line at 800.829.4933, Monday through Friday, from 7 a.m. to 7 p.m. local
time. As with the online application, the EIN is issued during the
telephone contact.
By fax
Taxpayers can fax completed Form
SS-4 applications
to the appropriate fax number of their state branch (see Where to File:
Business Forms and Filing
Addresses),
after making sure all of the required information is filled out in Form
SS-4. If the entity is determined to require a new EIN, one will be
assigned. If the taxpayer’s fax number is provided, a fax will be sent
back with the EIN within four business days.
By mail
If you’re sending your completed EIN application by mail, expect
processing to take about four weeks. Make sure the Form
SS-4 contains all
of the required information. To locate the mailing address for your Form
SS-4, go to Where to File Your Taxes for Form
SS-4.
Many of the new entities now required to obtain a taxpayer ID number
also will be required to file new forms specific to their functions.
Moreover, even businesses familiar with the EIN system will need to know
the requirements for when a new taxpayer ID number is required.
If you and your business need guidance on how to obtain a taxpayer ID
number, consider reaching out to a payroll and tax service. Paycor helps
businesses both large and small with everyday tax issues, from obtaining
a taxpayer ID number to helping business with quarterly and annual tax
filing. Contact us today for more
information.
 Previous:
Next:
Stay up to date with the latest HR trends

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Employee satisfaction surveys are a great way to stay in tune with what your employees are thinking. Get real insights on how to engage and motivate your team.

        Article      
Read Time: 10 min
Employee burnout can impact work quality and morale. Discover the warning signs for burnout and how to prevent it in your workplace.

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Being an effective leader requires more than just technical knowledge. Create an environment where everyone can thrive and understand emotions in oneself and others.
HCM Software
HR + Payroll Software
Talent Management
Workforce Management
Employee Experience
Benefits Administration
Quick Links
Services + Support
855-565-3285
Talk to Sales
855-752-8564
© 2023 Paycor, Inc  |  Refer Paycor  |  Privacy Policy  |  1-800-501-9462 |
*Represents approximately 30,000 corporate clients covering 40,000 businesses employing people