Paid Sick Leave Laws by State for 2023

Private employers across the U.S. are required to provide some form of paid sick leave to eligible employees. Ensure you're complying with sick leave laws.

Benefits Administration
Last Updated: January 1, 2023 | Read Time: 24 min
Everyone, at one time or another, has worked with that person who comes to work with a bad cold. Not only is it annoying, but it also jeopardizes the health of other employees. Have you ever stopped to think that maybe co-worker came to work because they didn’t have enough paid sick time available and wouldn’t get paid for a missed day or two.
In the past, granting paid sick leave was at the employer’s discretion in the private sector. While employees are covered for long-term leave under the Family and Medical Leave Act (FMLA), there’s no federal paid sick leave act that requires a private employer to pay for short-term illness. We’re seeing a growing movement of laws being created at state and local levels designed to protect employees who might be forced to choose between going to work sick and infecting their co-workers, or calling in sick and potentially losing pay and, in the worst-case scenario, even their jobs.
Some cities such as Los Angeles have further expanded the definition for family members who are covered under an employer’s sick leave policies: “An employee’s child, spouse, registered domestic partner, parent, parent-in-law, sibling, grandparent, grandchild, and any individual related by blood or affinity whose close association with the employee is the equivalent of a family relationship.”
Private employers in more than a dozen states, plus two dozen municipalities across the U.S. are required to provide some form of paid sick leave to an eligible employee. If you have employees in any state or municipality that has paid sick leave laws, you should take every step possible to help ensure you’re in compliance with those laws. Your job is even more difficult if your company does business in multiple states or localities, each of which may have their own paid sick leave laws.
With so many different rules, it’s important to understand the nuances of each law and determine how the laws work together (or don’t) so you can write appropriate leave policies, establish procedures, and guide your management teams.
If you do have to follow paid sick leave requirements, one of the main decisions you’ll need to make is whether your employees will accrue their paid sick time based on the number of hours they work each week or if they will draw from a bank of sick time that is frontloaded at the start of every year. If you have multiple locations, you’ll also need to decide if you will apply a single policy to every location or if you will apply different policies for each state or municipality where your employees work.
Many paid sick leave laws also include “safe time” or “safe leave” provisions, which provide paid sick leave entitlements to employees affected by domestic violence, sexual assault or stalking. Under these laws, an employee may be allowed to take leave not only to get medical care but also to attend court proceedings, move, go to counseling appointments, or receive services from a victim’s services group.
Employees are typically protected from any employer retaliation when asking for or using their sick leave hours. So, it’s critical that your managers not only understand the laws and any procedures they’re required to follow when an employee submits a sick leave request, but also understand that any negative reaction to a request could be viewed as retaliatory in nature.
Arizona, California, Colorado, Connecticut, Maryland, Massachusetts, Michigan, New Jersey, New Mexico, New York, Oregon, Rhode Island, Vermont, Washington, Washington, D.C. have mandatory paid sick leave laws. Maine and Nevada have laws requiring accrued paid time off not limited to sick time.
No. Paid sick leave depends on the state or municipality.
The main difference between exempt and non-exempt employees is eligibility for overtime pay. Exempt employees are not covered by the Fair Labor Standards Act (FSLA) and do not receive overtime pay, while non-exempt employees can.
Paid sick leave laws enable covered employees to take paid time off for medical care for themselves, a family member, or in some states, a close friend.
The following is a high-level overview of paid sick leave laws by state for private sector employers. Keep in mind this list is not inclusive of every state law; there are many more nuances to understand. States that are omitted do not have laws regulating paid time off.
 Previous:
Next:
Stay up to date with the latest HR trends

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Employee satisfaction surveys are a great way to stay in tune with what your employees are thinking. Get real insights on how to engage and motivate your team.

        Article      
Read Time: 10 min
Employee burnout can impact work quality and morale. Discover the warning signs for burnout and how to prevent it in your workplace.

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Being an effective leader requires more than just technical knowledge. Create an environment where everyone can thrive and understand emotions in oneself and others.
HCM Software
HR + Payroll Software
Talent Management
Workforce Management
Employee Experience
Benefits Administration
Quick Links
Services + Support
855-565-3285
Talk to Sales
855-752-8564
© 2023 Paycor, Inc  |  Refer Paycor  |  Privacy Policy  |  1-800-501-9462 |
*Represents approximately 30,000 corporate clients covering 40,000 businesses employing people