Can a Disengaged Employee Be Saved?

Disengaged workers can be costly for their company. Learn to identify the signals of a disengaged employee and how to decide if the they're worth saving.

Employee Experience
Last Updated:  January 30, 2020 | Read Time: 7 min
The ideal employee experience begins with hopeful, positive expectations on both ends; however, we all know things don’t always work out for the best. Employees wander off the path and get disengaged for many reasons.
Workers are more engaged in their first six months on a job than they are at any other stage of their employment with a company. At the six-month mark, after the honeymoon is over, about half (52%) of employees remain engaged. Forty percent are not engaged at all, and approximately one in 10 (8%) is actively disengaged, according to Gallup.
For the past several years, Gallup surveys have revealed that, overall, only about a third of the workforce is actively engaged – and disengaged employees cost the country somewhere between $483 and $605 billion every year – so clearly, this is a serious problem. All too often, this lack of engagement happens on teams where managers become too complacent and don’t realize their employees have become less committed to their jobs and the company as a whole.

Unfortunately, your employees typically don’t tell you point-blank that they’re disengaged; they might not even be aware of it themselves. So, first things first: How do you identify disengaged employees?

Once you’ve identified your employees who are less-than-connected, you have to ask yourself, “Do I want to keep this employee?” Yes, this might sound like a harsh question, but remember, keeping an employee on your payroll who might never change isn’t good for anyone. At the same time, you don’t want to make a knee-jerk decision and terminate the employee right off the bat. After all, engagement is a spectrum and at any given time, nearly 70% of the American workforce is not exactly engaged with their work. So, letting someone go isn’t always going to solve the problem. Think about where your employees land on a disengagement scale of “At Risk,” “Complacent,” and “Toxic.” If they are already toxic, chances are they can’t be saved, but you can likely work with the other two types.
The best way to assess whether an employee is worth spending time and money trying to re-engage is to ask questions:

Assuming you come to the decision that an employee is, in fact worth saving, here are some things you can do to get them re-engaged:
When previously engaged employees are checked out, they have a negative impact on the whole team. Motivation, collaboration, and productivity all take a hit. Following these tips to turn around the disengagement can help your team member return to delivering great work and results and get the entire team back on track.
Paycor creates HR software for leaders who want to make a difference. Our Human Capital Management (HCM) platform modernizes every aspect of people management, from the way you recruit, onboard and develop people, to the way you pay and retain them. But what really sets us apart is our focus on business leaders. For 30 years, we’ve been listening to and partnering with leaders, so we know what they need: HR technology that saves time, powerful analytics that provide actionable insights and dedicated support from HR experts. That’s why more than 30,000 medium & small businesses trust Paycor to help them solve problems and achieve their goals.
For more inspiration and action plans to create a meaningful experience for your employees, visit our dedicated resource hub.
 Previous:
Next:
Stay up to date with the latest HR trends

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Employee satisfaction surveys are a great way to stay in tune with what your employees are thinking. Get real insights on how to engage and motivate your team.

        Article      
Read Time: 10 min
Employee burnout can impact work quality and morale. Discover the warning signs for burnout and how to prevent it in your workplace.

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Being an effective leader requires more than just technical knowledge. Create an environment where everyone can thrive and understand emotions in oneself and others.
HCM Software
HR + Payroll Software
Talent Management
Workforce Management
Employee Experience
Benefits Administration
Quick Links
Services + Support
855-565-3285
Talk to Sales
855-752-8564
© 2023 Paycor, Inc  |  Refer Paycor  |  Privacy Policy  |  1-800-501-9462 |
*Represents approximately 30,000 corporate clients covering 40,000 businesses employing people