Small Business vs Large Corporations

Employee experience at a small business vs corporation can differ dramatically. We explain the advantages of working for a small business over big business.

Employee Experience
Last Updated: January 9, 2020 | Read Time: 5 min
The reality is, when it comes to hiring, big corporations are often at an advantage. They can attract talented people with big, resume – building projects and supercharged growth opportunities. In an historically tight labor market, it might seem tougher than ever for small businesses to attract top talent. However, small business owners shouldn’t feel too bad. Here’s why.
While they might get less time in the limelight, companies with fewer than 100 employees do still employ more than a third of the U.S. workforce, according to the most recent census. What is attracting these employees to smaller scale operations rather than big names? A lot of it comes down to having their voices heard, being part of great teams, and seeing the difference their work makes. If you’re a small business owner, let’s break down the pitch you can make to potential employees who don’t know whether a small business or corporation is right for them.
In fact, smaller companies can leverage their recruiting processes to showcase what they offer employees that corporations can’t – more personalized experiences, responsive feedback and less bureaucracy. If a candidate is weighing up job offers from small business vs corporation, a superior recruiting process – being able to talk with future coworkers and getting the chance to see a company culture up close – could make all the difference.
Company culture has to start at the top – but as a company grows, getting that to filter all the way down becomes more difficult. It can be much easier for a smaller organization to maintain the values and beliefs of the founder, because in many cases, the founder still works there.
Most of all, at a smaller company, employees can avoid “small cog syndrome”, that feeling of being a tiny part of a massive structure. They are more likely to be able to directly see the difference their work makes – that’s great news for company culture and employee engagement, and it’s a great advantage for small businesses over big businesses.
But recognition isn’t just about opportunities for progression and promotion. It’s also about being listened to when you have ideas, or supported when you require help or have a complaint. It’s crucial that employees feel like their work is seen and their voice is heard – and no matter how many structures corporations put in place to make sure this is true, it’ll always be simpler at a small business.
Small businesses have an advantage over corporations when it comes to designing an employee experience that brings out the best in your people and gives them real motivation to stay engaged. To learn how to create the ideal employee experience, check out our infographic here.

 Previous:
Next:
Stay up to date with the latest HR trends

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Employee satisfaction surveys are a great way to stay in tune with what your employees are thinking. Get real insights on how to engage and motivate your team.

        Article      
Read Time: 10 min
Employee burnout can impact work quality and morale. Discover the warning signs for burnout and how to prevent it in your workplace.

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Being an effective leader requires more than just technical knowledge. Create an environment where everyone can thrive and understand emotions in oneself and others.
HCM Software
HR + Payroll Software
Talent Management
Workforce Management
Employee Experience
Benefits Administration
Quick Links
Services + Support
855-565-3285
Talk to Sales
855-752-8564
© 2023 Paycor, Inc  |  Refer Paycor  |  Privacy Policy  |  1-800-501-9462 |
*Represents approximately 30,000 corporate clients covering 40,000 businesses employing people