Why Managers Should Focus on Coaching, Not Managing

Employees love to learn and are often receptive to coaching from their manager.  Unlock the power of coaching your workforce, here.

Talent Management
Last Updated: May 25, 2021 | Read Time: 5 min
Employees love to learn. In fact, 94% say they’d stick around longer with a company which invested in their development. But here’s a puzzle: why do employees hate employee reviews? You might think feedback on performance is the number one thing they’d want.
The answer: employees understand traditional appraisals are all about evaluation not development. Some employees worry they’re more likely to end up on a performance improvement plan than hear actionable advice they can use to further their career.
It doesn’t have to be that way. Better performance management is possible, when it’s employee-oriented. If managers learn to see themselves as coaches, rather than disciplinarians, they will facilitate a culture of self-improvement and employee engagement.
Leaders who don’t coach will always struggle to earn full commitment from their employees. As younger generations come to dominate the workforce, employee expectations are changing. Employees want to be challenged, but not micromanaged. According to research by Deloitte, Gen Y are eager to take on more responsibility in order to advance. While pay plays a part, meaningful development opportunities matter.
So, where does coaching fit? The two main components of coaching are goal setting and feedback. A great coach provides a concrete roadmap showing employees what they can achieve. Goal setting means employees always know the direction they are working towards—even if it’s up to them which path to take. Rather than micromanaging, you’re inspiring them with the bigger picture.Continuous feedback gives employees the opportunity to keep improving. If they need support, they should get it immediately. This mindset means the end of annual performance reviews. Think like a sports coach—you’re there to give your people the tools they need to win. Coaches give feedback whenever necessary, rather than waiting till the end of the season.
It’s not just employees who feel the benefits of moving toward employee-focused performance management and away from traditional top-down performance appraisals.  Here are three key ways coaching can benefit your organization:
Paycor creates HR software for leaders who want to make a difference. Our Human Capital Management (HCM) platform modernizes every aspect of people management, from the way you recruit, onboard and develop people, to the way you pay and retain them. But what really sets us apart is our focus on business leaders. For 30 years, we’ve been listening to and partnering with leaders, so we know what they need: HR technology that saves time, powerful analytics that provide actionable insights and dedicated support from HR experts.
 Previous:
Next:
Stay up to date with the latest HR trends

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Employee satisfaction surveys are a great way to stay in tune with what your employees are thinking. Get real insights on how to engage and motivate your team.

        Article      
Read Time: 10 min
Employee burnout can impact work quality and morale. Discover the warning signs for burnout and how to prevent it in your workplace.

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Being an effective leader requires more than just technical knowledge. Create an environment where everyone can thrive and understand emotions in oneself and others.
HCM Software
HR + Payroll Software
Talent Management
Workforce Management
Employee Experience
Benefits Administration
Quick Links
Services + Support
855-565-3285
Talk to Sales
855-752-8564
© 2023 Paycor, Inc  |  Refer Paycor  |  Privacy Policy  |  1-800-501-9462 |
*Represents approximately 30,000 corporate clients covering 40,000 businesses employing people