CMS Waives Quality Reporting Requirements Due to COVID-19

The Center for Medicare & Medicaid Services will waive key reporting requirements due to Coronavirus. Read how this impacts healthcare providers.

Workforce Management
Last Updated:  April 10, 2020 | Read Time: 3 min
Many government officials are worried the Coronavirus outbreak will overburden the U.S. healthcare system. In a drastic effort to help healthcare providers focus on patient care rather than paperwork, the Center for Medicare & Medicaid Services (CMS) will waive multiple key quality reporting requirements.
The deadlines for 2019 data submission for the Medicare Shared Savings Program, the Quality Payment Program, and affiliated merit-based incentive program (MIPS) will be extended from March 31 to April 30, 2020. MIPS eligible clinicians who miss the April 30 deadline will qualify for the automatic and uncontrollable circumstances policy and will receive a neutral payment adjustment for the 2021 MIPS payment year.
CMS made the decision to exempt Q4 data for 11 hospital-based quality programs and six post-acute programs. Including:
*Although submitting the data is optional, CMS will count the data should a healthcare provider choose to do so.
Operators are not being required to submit data for Q1 and Q2 of 2020. And qualifying claims for the SNF VBP program will be excluded from the claims-based 30-day All-Cause Readmission Measure for the first two quarters of 2020.
In addition to the waived reporting requirements, all merit-based incentive payments will remain in place to promote quality care to patients.
Previously, the release of the 2020 Minimum Data Set was scheduled for October 1, 2020, but recently announced it would push back the publishing date in response to the concerns of healthcare providers. In the meantime, CMS is working closely with stakeholders to determine the potential impacts of the delay, along with a compressed timeline for healthcare providers to train staff and update their IT systems.
For expert advice and support during this public health emergency, visit Paycor’s Coronavirus Support Center.
Paycor builds HR software for leaders of medium & small business. For 30 years, we’ve been listening to and partnering with leaders, so we know what they need: HCM technology that saves time, powerful analytics and expert HR advice to help them solve problems and achieve their goals.
 Previous:
Next:
Stay up to date with the latest HR trends

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Employee satisfaction surveys are a great way to stay in tune with what your employees are thinking. Get real insights on how to engage and motivate your team.

        Article      
Read Time: 10 min
Employee burnout can impact work quality and morale. Discover the warning signs for burnout and how to prevent it in your workplace.

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Being an effective leader requires more than just technical knowledge. Create an environment where everyone can thrive and understand emotions in oneself and others.
HCM Software
HR + Payroll Software
Talent Management
Workforce Management
Employee Experience
Benefits Administration
Quick Links
Services + Support
855-565-3285
Talk to Sales
855-752-8564
© 2023 Paycor, Inc  |  Refer Paycor  |  Privacy Policy  |  1-800-501-9462 |
*Represents approximately 30,000 corporate clients covering 40,000 businesses employing people