45 OKR Examples, Write Effective Objectives and Key Results

Objectives and key results (OKRs) help organizations get alignment amongst teams. See how your workforce can benefit from using OKR methodology.

Get OKR examples to align employee priorities with company goals.
Download Your 
                                   Free Copy 

DOWNLOADS:  871 And Counting...!
Get examples and tips for writing OKRs
If you care about business success and employee engagement (who doesn’t?), you need to care about setting clear goals. That’s why so many companies are embracing objectives and key results (OKRs) as the best practice for committing to goals and following through on them. But if you’re new to OKRs, it can be hard to know where to start, which is why we wrote this guide.
We’re going to tell you everything you need to know about how to write great OKRs. Better yet, we’re offering 45 OKR examples, covering different departments, industries and employee-ranks.
Here’s what to expect:
The OKRs methodology is a system for setting, cascading and communicating goals throughout your company.
We use OKRs at Paycor, and they’ve proven to save time and help build a transparent culture where everyone feels involved.
Simply put, objectives are outcomes that reflect current company, department or personal priorities.
Every objective corresponds with up to 5 corresponding key results that…
If it’s not quite clear yet, don’t worry. Have a look at the following OKR example…
Objective: Create more transparency across the organization (by the end of FY21 Q4) by achieving these key results
The objective is challenging, but that’s how it should be.
The key results indicate essential milestones that need to happen before your objective or outcome can be achieved. This should break down the actions you need to take to make it happen.
Beware: don’t confuse key results with tasks. Tasks should be generated based on key results.
One of the benefits of using OKRs is the alignment of individual objectives to high-level company objectives, to drive focus and understanding of why an objective is important to the organization as a whole.
To see the full benefits of the OKR methodology, you need to select the appropriate alignment model for your company. Let’s talk through the two most common OKR alignment models.
The full alignment model appeals to corporations and large departments, integrating well with established management processes that are usually top-down.
It’s also more manageable to establish cascading OKRs in this way because employees can clearly see how goals are being aligned.

As you can see, the CEO sits at the top level of the company.
One level down, we have the Director of Product and Director of Marketing. In this top-down model, their objectives will be taken directly from the key results of the CEO.
The flexible alignment model appeals to startups and smaller teams.
The nature of this OKR alignment inspires companies that have flexible cultures which promote agile changes and growth. While all objectives are ultimately aligned with higher level OKRs, there is no strict alignment that prevents individuals from setting personal growth OKRs.

The CEO still sits at the top level, just as in the Full Alignment Model. However, the change lies in how the OKRs are being cascaded to the next level. Rather than creating objectives from a superior’s key results, managers can set their own department OKRs, as long as they align with the company OKRs.
OKRs are time-boxed and run for a predetermined amount of time. It’s your decision as to how long that span is.
Most organizations use a quarterly cadence, meaning every OKR runs for a three-month span. This is often seen as short-term enough that every week counts, but long enough that real progress can be made.
The OKR methodology is most successful when there is a rhythmic process attached to it.
While most organizations devote time and resources to create OKRs, leaders should also focus on internal processes such as check-ins, 1-on-1s, and feedback loops in between to receive real-time updates as well as to provide proactive support.

As a leader, selecting an OKR methodology is just the start. Your next job is to make it a success. The good news is, you have a secret weapon: managers.
Any company that leads from the top won’t get far without manager buy-in: you need them to demonstrate by example.
Your managers or department heads are the best people to consult when creating annual OKRs. Task them with drafting alternative objectives that fit the company, keeping in mind they have different departmental priorities.
At Paycor, we recommend rolling out OKRs before a new year or quarterly cycle within your company.
For leaders to begin setting company OKRs, it’s important to take a look back at where this whole process starts. The cascading diagram below shows how your vision is linked all the way down to both your annual and quarterly OKRs.

Companies look to OKRs at different stages of their lifecycle. When looking at companies in the mature stages of their growth lifecycle, we can easily distinguish their vision, mission statement and long term goals. For these mature companies, converting company visions, missions statements and even annual plans into annual or quarterly OKRs is a shorter process as the foundation has already be laid given developed metrics and strategies of success. Companies at earlier stages of their growth lifecycle on the other hand may fall anywhere in the development stages from defining performance management metrics to building success strategies.
Many goal setting methodologies help with the “What” but do not emphasize the “How”. To be able to execute as a company, it is necessary to discover the “Why” factor. It’s important for employees to understand what is driving the company. When a company is able to strongly define why they are doing what we are doing, it then allows for more transparency and insight on what success is and how it can be reached.Defining a Company Vision for OKRs
The magic of OKRs is that everything begins with the end in mind. In other words, all goals should be directed by what your vision statement describes. A company vision should be easily stated in one sentence describing what your company aspires to be. It’s time to dream big.
Disney: To make people happy.
Ikea: To create a better everyday life for the many people.
Paycor: To help leaders develop winning teams.
As you can see, vision statements are aspirational. It’s asking the company and leadership team, “Why are we doing what we are doing?”
In the tech industry, company vision is often linked to a Big Hairy Audacious Goal (BHAG). A term coined by Jim Collins in “Built to Last”, BHAG pushes boundaries and challenges the company.
Company vision statements can often be mistaken as something of a catchy tagline. While a vision statement can sound smart and memorable, like the examples above, it’s for your team and culture, not a sales tactic. Therefore, it’s not necessary to pigeonhole the company vision statement in order to make it sound appealing to everyone else. A company vision needs to be big and challenging. Sure it might take years to achieve the company vision, but at the end of the day, no one said it would be easy.
You might be wondering “How does my whole vision translate into my mission statement?” or “What is the difference between my vision and mission?” Your vision describes the end result of your efforts, but your mission statement details the reason for your company’s existence. Your mission statement is where you outline how your products or services will lead to accomplishing your vision. Let’s revisit two of our previous examples: Disney and IKEA.
The mission of the Walt Disney Company is to be one of the world’s leading producers and providers of entertainment and information. Using our portfolio of brands to differentiate our content, services and consumer products, we seek to develop creative, innovative and profitable entertainment experiences and related products in the world.
Our business idea supports this vision by offering a wide range of well-designed, functional home furnishing products at prices so low that as many people as possible will be able to afford them.
One highly recommended exercise for all leaders is the Hedgehog Concept by Jim Collins. The Hedgehog Concept is based on an ancient Greek parable that states: “The fox knows many things, but the hedgehog knows one big thing”. To narrow down your mission statement, the Hedgehog Concept encourages you to think of 3 main components:
Revisiting the hedgehog concept, it can be used as a starting point for strategically planning to achieve a mission statement as it outlines three main categories:
Think big! Set the appropriate expectations for team members. There are companies who are all for pushing the boundaries. Setting challenging OKRs and pushing everyone to go above and beyond is not a bad thing. If that’s the case, make sure the right benchmark is set. Over-challenging objectives tend to be demotivating to team members if they feel out of reach and unattainable. It’s important to strike the right balance.
Writing OKRs isn’t easy. The best goals combine broad company vision with specific, measure results. It’s good to be ambitious, but OKRs also need to be achievable and measurable. To help businesses, Paycor is offering 45 examples of great OKRs, covering a wide range of job functions and department-levels. Fill out the form for access.
NEXT:
NEXT: