Ask HR: Can We Dictate Employee Behavior Outside Of Work?

Employers are limited in how much control they can exert when employees are not on duty. Read up on proactive measures organizations can employ.

Talent Management
Last Updated:  February 5, 2019 | Read Time: 3 min
Whether you’re commenting on Twitter or posting images on Facebook, it’s
important that you’re mindful of your behavior and how your words could
affect others. Though you’re off the clock, your co-workers could be
impacted by certain behavior which could translate into uncertainty or
discomfort in the office. How can your organization prevent this
potential issue?
You don’t have to stop being social. Let the expert professionals at HR
Support Center help guide you through this delicate situation.
Can we dictate employee behavior outside of the workplace?
Employers are limited in how much control can be exerted when employees are not on duty.
We know issues may arise when employees engage in social activities
after hours where they feel they can let loose or otherwise act in a way
that is inconsistent with the policies outlined in the employee handbook. While an employer can’t
regulate what goes on in that setting—in fact, many states protect legal
off-duty conduct—you can expect and require that there not be any
residual effects that carry over into the workplace. For instance, if an
employee made threatening comments about a certain religious group on
their Facebook page, and these comments were seen by another employee
who then felt fear in the workplace, you would need to address this
behavior.
It’s also worth keeping in mind that there is a higher legal standard
for the behavior of supervisors. Employers will always be responsible
for harassment by a supervisor that results in a tangible employment
action like demotion, termination, or constructive discharge—even if the
harassment originated outside the workplace. And even if the harassment
from a supervisor doesn’t lead to a tangible employment action, the
employer is liable unless it proves that it exercised reasonable care to
prevent and correct the harassment and that the employee “unreasonably”
failed to complain to management.
Your best defense is a clear sexual and unlawful harassment policy along
with well-trained managers. This should help limit problematic behavior
outside of the workplace, as well as assist your managers and
supervisors in dealing with these issues if they begin in, or seep into,
the workplace.
This content came from a team of HR professionals at HR Support Center.
Businesses like yours can pay a yearly fee for HR Support Center and
receive awesome subscription perks like these:
The list goes on. HR Support
Center is one of the many features in our HR & Benefits Software.
it is not only feature rich, it’s inexpensive: one entire year of HR
Support Center is cheaper than one hour of a typical attorney’s time.
Contact us today to sign up.
 Previous:
Next:
Stay up to date with the latest HR trends

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Employee satisfaction surveys are a great way to stay in tune with what your employees are thinking. Get real insights on how to engage and motivate your team.

        Article      
Read Time: 10 min
Employee burnout can impact work quality and morale. Discover the warning signs for burnout and how to prevent it in your workplace.

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Being an effective leader requires more than just technical knowledge. Create an environment where everyone can thrive and understand emotions in oneself and others.
HCM Software
HR + Payroll Software
Talent Management
Workforce Management
Employee Experience
Benefits Administration
Quick Links
Services + Support
855-565-3285
Talk to Sales
855-752-8564
© 2023 Paycor, Inc  |  Refer Paycor  |  Privacy Policy  |  1-800-501-9462 |
*Represents approximately 30,000 corporate clients covering 40,000 businesses employing people