7 Tips on How to Set Objectives and Key Results (OKRs)

Using OKRs is a great way to achieve goals within an organization. Here are the tips to get adoption of the OKR methodology by your employees and managers.

Talent Management
Last Updated: October 6, 2022 | Read Time: 7 min
The OKR (Objectives and Key Results) method is a proven method businesses use to set and achieve key business objectives. In simple terms, OKRs help leaders to put structure around a goal so that its achievement can be fast-tracked.
While their structure and what they contain are paramount, the key to their success is  buy-in and alignment from every level of your organization.
To create an OKR, executives first set annual, quarterly or even monthly objectives. It is then up to managers to set goals for their teams. At that point employees can define their own individual objectives in relation to the OKR for which they’ll be held accountable.
An OKR can help a business achieve success on multiple levels. Let’s take a look at how you can help your team successfully set up OKRs.
Objectives and Key Results are designed to drive teams to specific outcomes. Even so, the objectives themselves are generally non-specific by intention. The objectives should be seen as a direction. The initiatives that are developed by the management team will be more prescriptive in what needs to be done.
OKRs can be focused around:
It’s important to understand that while a company can have a set of OKRs, it’s not uncommon for units within the business to have ones as well although these should be compatible with the company’s OKRs.
Sales teams may want OKRs to shorten the sales cycle, increase the average individual sale or improve the win-to-loss ratio.
Marketing teams may use OKRs to increase customer awareness, position the company as an industry “thought leader” or improve the brand’s public perception.
OKRs aren’t only created for external goals. The IT team can build an OKR that would help them to facilitate a system upgrade, launch an app or automate certain tasks.
OKRs should not be constructed in an executive vacuum if you want them to be successful. Because OKRs are omni-directional tools, there should be input from all team members who might be affected.
Yes, this can create a lot of discussion and “I want to sees…” but the goal will be for you to keep the group focused on the goals that need to be met and then structuring the OKR to get there. Remember the more specific you can be, the better your chances of success.
Creating goals that inspire your people and produce results takes real skill. But it can be just as difficult for employees to find objectives that are measurable and align with the bigger picture of what the company is trying to achieve. If employees are new to OKRs, it can be easy to get overwhelmed. That’s why we’ve collected these tips:
Paycor understands how OKRs can help a business see success, which is why our Talent Development product is designed to help you develop and drive OKRs within a business unit or across the organization.
With Paycor, you can modernize every aspect of people management, from the way you recruit, onboard and develop your team, to the way you pay and retain them. See how Paycor can help the leaders of your organization solve the problems of today and tomorrow.
 Previous:
Next:
Stay up to date with the latest HR trends

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Employee satisfaction surveys are a great way to stay in tune with what your employees are thinking. Get real insights on how to engage and motivate your team.

        Article      
Read Time: 10 min
Employee burnout can impact work quality and morale. Discover the warning signs for burnout and how to prevent it in your workplace.

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Being an effective leader requires more than just technical knowledge. Create an environment where everyone can thrive and understand emotions in oneself and others.
HCM Software
HR + Payroll Software
Talent Management
Workforce Management
Employee Experience
Benefits Administration
Quick Links
Services + Support
855-565-3285
Talk to Sales
855-752-8564
© 2023 Paycor, Inc  |  Refer Paycor  |  Privacy Policy  |  1-800-501-9462 |
*Represents approximately 30,000 corporate clients covering 40,000 businesses employing people