Company Core Values: Why to Have Them

Core values are the foundation to a company culture. See why they matter and how you can define company core values at your organization.

Talent Management
Last Updated: May 25, 2021 | Read Time: 6 min
If you care about creating a winning culture (and you should), you need to care about your company core values. These aren’t just meant to just look good on your website. Values should play a real role throughout your organization, inspiring employees and providing a measure by which performance can be judged.
When a business is just getting started, core values might not seem all that important. But as time passes, employees need a reason to believe in a company and be inspired by its journey. If employees strongly identify with a company’s core values, they’ll be more likely to stick around long-term. Powerful value systems will also motivate top talent to join your company.
Core values aren’t just helpful for boosting employee recruitment and retention. They should be at the heart of your decision making around performance management. When setting goals, long-term or short-term, company-wide or for individual employees, you should ask: do these targets align with our company values? Then, when assessing performance: does this employee or team embody our core values?
A common problem is understanding the difference between values that define your company in the long-term and those which are only applicable for a short time. For instance, a startup culture might be defined by a “work hard, play hard” attitude. However, will (and should this) this be a defining feature when the company expands or is hit by an economic downturn? It could, but more likely company culture will change over time. How do you find the real core values of your company? While leadership can certainly influence values, simply deciding on new values is a lost cause. You want to have the “best” values in your industry, but it’s not always a matter of choice. Your company already has values; it’s up to you to discover them. See some examples of strong company cultures here.
A great way to discover core values is to ask your employees directly. Not just any employees, but your high performers, who are respected by leadership and their peers. Have them identify what they see as core values. Have them discuss whether these values are truly fundamental, now and for the future.
Here’s the big question: would they continue to believe in these values even if they became a competitive disadvantage? If the answer is no, then they aren’t really core values at all! Values can help your business, but they don’t exist only to help your business. 
Enough theory. Time to take a look at what core values actually look in practice. We’ve collected ten examples of core values, with definitions, common across organizations in different industries:
Paycor creates HR software for leaders who want to make a difference. Our Human Capital Management (HCM) platform modernizes every aspect of people management, from the way you recruit, onboard and develop people, to the way you pay and retain them.
 Previous:
Next:
Stay up to date with the latest HR trends

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Employee satisfaction surveys are a great way to stay in tune with what your employees are thinking. Get real insights on how to engage and motivate your team.

        Article      
Read Time: 10 min
Employee burnout can impact work quality and morale. Discover the warning signs for burnout and how to prevent it in your workplace.

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Being an effective leader requires more than just technical knowledge. Create an environment where everyone can thrive and understand emotions in oneself and others.
HCM Software
HR + Payroll Software
Talent Management
Workforce Management
Employee Experience
Benefits Administration
Quick Links
Services + Support
855-565-3285
Talk to Sales
855-752-8564
© 2023 Paycor, Inc  |  Refer Paycor  |  Privacy Policy  |  1-800-501-9462 |
*Represents approximately 30,000 corporate clients covering 40,000 businesses employing people