How to Celebrate Diwali in the Workplace

Acknowledging cultural traditions in the workplace can contribute to your DEI strategy. Let’s take a closer look at how you can celebrate Diwali at work.

Employee Experience
Last Updated: October 5, 2022 | Read Time: 7 min
If your organization enjoys holiday celebrations, Diwali is one you may want to add to your calendar. The celebration of Diwali at work can be a fun way to acknowledge other cultural traditions, which could be a great addition to your DE&I strategy.
Let’s take a closer look at the festival, what is celebrated and how you can bring elements of Diwali into an office environment.
Before you begin a celebration or tradition, it’s important to understand what Diwali represents and why it is celebrated.
Although many employees may be in a remote or hybrid work situation there are still opportunities for the company to engage employees in a celebration of this major festival.
It’s a five-day festival so the easiest way to get people engaged is to encourage them to celebrate each day’s “theme.” Here are a few ideas related to the days/themes:
Diwali is a religious festival as well and it is on this day that Lakshmi Puja occurs as celebrants invite the goddess Lakshmi into their homes.
You could do something off-site as a group or something simple together like make cards for the local children’s hospital to deliver to patients. And this could even be done virtually.
If you are able to pull a large group together to celebrate, here are some activities you might consider doing to celebrate this major festival.
Incorporating Diwali celebrations into your office is a great way to promote an inclusive workplace.  (It’s also a fun way to experience other cultures!)
For more free resources and tools that promote DE&I best practices in the workplace, visit Perspectives+. It’s Paycor’s online knowledge library designed to help our partner network drive change, empower colleagues, and foster new leaders.
 Previous:
Next:
Stay up to date with the latest HR trends

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Employee satisfaction surveys are a great way to stay in tune with what your employees are thinking. Get real insights on how to engage and motivate your team.

        Article      
Read Time: 10 min
Employee burnout can impact work quality and morale. Discover the warning signs for burnout and how to prevent it in your workplace.

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Being an effective leader requires more than just technical knowledge. Create an environment where everyone can thrive and understand emotions in oneself and others.
HCM Software
HR + Payroll Software
Talent Management
Workforce Management
Employee Experience
Benefits Administration
Quick Links
Services + Support
855-565-3285
Talk to Sales
855-752-8564
© 2023 Paycor, Inc  |  Refer Paycor  |  Privacy Policy  |  1-800-501-9462 |
*Represents approximately 30,000 corporate clients covering 40,000 businesses employing people