The Pros and Cons of a Vaccine Mandate at Work

Can you require Covid-19 vaccinations for your employees? Here are the things you should know now about the pros and cons of vaccine mandates.

Workforce Management
Last Updated: January 13, 2022 | Read Time: 8 min

link this to the new article about vaccine refusal.
January 13, 2022 Update: The Supreme Court ruled to block the proposed vaccine-or-test mandate for large employers (businesses with 100 employees or more). In a separate ruling, the court voted in favor of a vaccine mandate for workers employed at healthcare facilities that receive federal funding through Medicare and Medicaid. It’s estimated that this ruling could affect more than 17 million workers.
For healthcare organizations and employers that choose to establish vaccination and testing requirements, Paycor is here to support you with an immunization tracker, expert HR advice and a comprehensive suite of products to help keep your business compliant. Contact our team or learn more here.
If you’re wondering whether you can require Covid-19 vaccinations for your employees, the answer is yes—generally speaking. Undoubtedly, company mandates will be tried in court, but vaccine mandates are supported by Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC) guidance.
The EEOC says you can require employees to get the shot so long as doing so doesn’t violate discrimination laws, including legal requirements for disability and religious accommodations. Also, the decision to mandate must be based on objective facts and related to job duties and workplace needs. The EEOC says such policies are permissible to prevent an individual from posing a direct threat of health and safety to others.
Some of the pros of mandatory vaccinations at work include:
It’s also important to keep in mind that COVID-19 vaccines are FDA approved, having met their rigorous scientific standards for safety, effectiveness, and manufacturing quality. More than 380 million doses of the vaccine have been given in the U.S. from December 14, 2020, through September 13, 2021.
Before COVID-19, vaccine mandates for adults in the U.S. were uncommon and usually reserved for workers with specific jobs (like healthcare). So, unless you’re currently required by law to require vaccines for your employees, here are a few reasons why you might not want to. 
With health and safety at the forefront of every business leader’s mind, there are possible “meet-in-the-middle” solutions that you could encourage without risk of alienating your workforce, such as:
If you are mandating vaccines in the workplace, Paycor is here to help. For a sample policy, check out Paycor’s Employee COVID-19 Mandatory Vaccination Template. Our mobile-friendly Immunization Tracker gives you a way to manage and report the immunization status of your workforce. Employees can upload their current COVID information, whether that’s a vaccination card or test results, as often as needed. Only an approved HR administrator will be able to access vaccination data and run reports. To learn more about the Immunization Tracker and how Paycor can help you with vaccine compliance, be sure to request a consultation and visit Paycor.com.
Paycor is not a legal, tax, benefit, accounting or investment advisor. This document is intended for informational purposes only, and does not constitute legal information or advice. All communication from Paycor should be confirmed by your company’s legal, tax, benefit, accounting or investment advisor before making any decisions.
 Previous:
Next:
Stay up to date with the latest HR trends

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Employee satisfaction surveys are a great way to stay in tune with what your employees are thinking. Get real insights on how to engage and motivate your team.

        Article      
Read Time: 10 min
Employee burnout can impact work quality and morale. Discover the warning signs for burnout and how to prevent it in your workplace.

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Being an effective leader requires more than just technical knowledge. Create an environment where everyone can thrive and understand emotions in oneself and others.
HCM Software
HR + Payroll Software
Talent Management
Workforce Management
Employee Experience
Benefits Administration
Quick Links
Services + Support
855-565-3285
Talk to Sales
855-752-8564
© 2023 Paycor, Inc  |  Refer Paycor  |  Privacy Policy  |  1-800-501-9462 |
*Represents approximately 30,000 corporate clients covering 40,000 businesses employing people