HR Statistics You Need to Know for 2023

Human resources is a rapidly changing field. See the latest HR trends on everything from hiring and recruiting, to what the future holds.

Employee Experience
Last Updated: January 25, 2023 | Read Time: 13 min
The world of human resources is constantly evolving. Between job seekers with gig jobs like driving for Uber and high-tech advancements that enable remote work, employees have more power than ever. There’s a sustained desire to find a balance between work and life.
We also continue to see more job openings than available candidates. Job opportunities are abundant, meaning workers have fewer reasons to rely on and remain loyal to their employers. Especially if their employers don’t provide employee benefits and offer employees what they want.
As we enter 2023, we took a look at the stats and trends in human resources, hiring, and workplace culture. The future is here, so it’s important to understand the current employee engagement climate and be ready.
Candidates moving through the market have a range of opportunities, forcing companies and human resources managers to work harder than ever before to attract the best talent. With a healthy salary awaiting the average worker and less time spent looking for a job, it’s a candidate’s market.
With the challenges companies face recruiting top talent, it’s more important than ever to work on keeping existing employees happy. By focusing on the evolving expectations candidates have for employers, companies can easily address today’s wants and needs, thus increasing employee retention.
One of the biggest concerns with modern recruiting is maintaining a level of diversity. Greater diversity has been proven again and again to help a company thrive. But with a shortage of talent and the importance of new recruitment strategies and the interview process, companies ought to be on their best behavior.
With the rise of the gig economy, the Great Reshuffle, and emerging technology, it’s safe to say that the job landscape has been fundamentally altered. Flexible schedules, rising wages, and shifting benefits are the.
A note about our sources:
To compile this list, we reviewed a variety of third-party sources to offer a comprehensive view of the HR landscape as it is today. We vetted the sources to ensure that the statistics referenced are all from credible experts in the field, including Economic Policy Institute, Forbes, Harvard Business Review, LinkedIn, MetLife, Pew Research, SHRM, and the U.S. government, among others.
 Previous:
Next:
Stay up to date with the latest HR trends

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Employee satisfaction surveys are a great way to stay in tune with what your employees are thinking. Get real insights on how to engage and motivate your team.

        Article      
Read Time: 10 min
Employee burnout can impact work quality and morale. Discover the warning signs for burnout and how to prevent it in your workplace.

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Being an effective leader requires more than just technical knowledge. Create an environment where everyone can thrive and understand emotions in oneself and others.
HCM Software
HR + Payroll Software
Talent Management
Workforce Management
Employee Experience
Benefits Administration
Quick Links
Services + Support
855-565-3285
Talk to Sales
855-752-8564
© 2023 Paycor, Inc  |  Refer Paycor  |  Privacy Policy  |  1-800-501-9462 |
*Represents approximately 30,000 corporate clients covering 40,000 businesses employing people