Security Scheduling Software

Schedule your security guards in multiple locations all from the same platform.Track their accurate worked hours without having to supervise them personally.

Employee Experience
Last Updated:  January 9, 2020 | Read Time: 4 min
Paycor Scheduling allows you to schedule your security guards and officers in multiple locations all from the same platform, plus track their accurate worked hours without having to supervise them personally.
Managers and security agency owners often struggle when managing their team as they have multiple staff scattered across various locations. It’s difficult to track the exact start and end times of employees’ shifts, whether they come in late or don’t show up, or even if the designated employee is covering their shift. Keeping your employees informed of their assigned shifts can also be challenging, especially with security personnel working at various times throughout the day. With Paycor, you can effectively schedule your remote workers across any number of locations from the same platform. You can receive accurate reports of completed work hours for each employee, which will provide you with a clear overview of your labor expenses.
It is important for the right security guard to be in the right place and at the right time. Paycor’s security scheduling software provides you with the ultimate tool to ensure appropriate shift coverage and provide client satisfaction. The software can be tailored to your protection company’s needs and it simplifies your shift assigning process. Employees have the ability to request open shifts, trade shifts and request cover from other team members. Empowering employees to sort out their own schedules can increase their morale, reduce tardiness and eliminate conflicts. Communication is vital in such line of work which is why Paycor also provides a secure chatting platform through which you can contact your employees instantaneously.
Paycor’s guard scheduling software gives you the ability to schedule your employees across any number of locations, all through the same platform. Whether your staff are scattered across the city or even country, you can effectively manage them with Paycor. More importantly, your employees can instantaneously receive automated SMS and push notifications whenever you assign new shifts, regardless of their current whereabouts. This ensures all your security guards are aware of their shifts on time.
Paycor also has a mobile security guard scheduling application that makes sharing information quick and easy. Each employee can view their schedule at all times as well as clock in and out with their mobile device. Using the mobile app can improve your team’s communication and cohesiveness. You can also create schedules and receive requests via mobile phone. Now scheduling and tracking worked hours can be done on the go or even from the comfort of your own home.

 Previous:
Next:
Stay up to date with the latest HR trends

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Employee satisfaction surveys are a great way to stay in tune with what your employees are thinking. Get real insights on how to engage and motivate your team.

        Article      
Read Time: 10 min
Employee burnout can impact work quality and morale. Discover the warning signs for burnout and how to prevent it in your workplace.

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Being an effective leader requires more than just technical knowledge. Create an environment where everyone can thrive and understand emotions in oneself and others.
HCM Software
HR + Payroll Software
Talent Management
Workforce Management
Employee Experience
Benefits Administration
Quick Links
Services + Support
855-565-3285
Talk to Sales
855-752-8564
© 2023 Paycor, Inc  |  Refer Paycor  |  Privacy Policy  |  1-800-501-9462 |
*Represents approximately 30,000 corporate clients covering 40,000 businesses employing people