HR for Small Business - Be Successful

Developing strong HR practices is a key to success for every small business. Make sure you avoid these costly mistakes and stay compliant!

Employee Experience
Last Updated:  May 18, 2018 | Read Time: 8 min
As anyone who’s started their own business knows, building an accomplished company doesn’t just happen overnight. It takes hard work and dedication to create the right foundation and sustain success.
Think about the businesses you admire. Chances are they understood the importance of human capital and instituted HR best practices that would support them while they were small and as they grew.
The key to maintaining a successful business is developing excellent HR practices from the start. Doing so will help your business avoid costly mistakes and litigation, improve employee retention, and lead to company growth.
An employee handbook provides the foundation for what employees should expect when working for your business. From introducing new employees to your brand, mission and values, to communicating key company policies and showcasing the benefits you offer, the handbook is the go-to resource employees depend on for answers to their most pressing questions.
How to Structure the Handbook
If you need help creating your own employee handbook or are looking to make updates to a current version, here’s where to start:
Important Note: While a handbook is a key component of your business, simply having one is not enough. In order to prevent employee litigation down the road, be sure that every team member both reviews and signs your handbook. Keeping this documentation on file is a critical piece in the event an employee tries to bring a lawsuit against your business.

*Did You Know? *
Paycor’s HR Support Center On-Demand solution offers fully-customizable handbook templates to support your business? Whether you’re creating a handbook from scratch, or making updates to a current version, our team of dedicated experts can review your policies to ensure you’re steering clear of potential compliance mistakes.
Properly maintaining employee records is another important step businesses must take to mitigate risk. In each employee’s file you’ll want to keep things like:
Some data is considered confidential and must be stored separately, or not at all. Federal privacy laws prevent employers from sharing employee medical files with certain entities. Be sure you check with your state as their requirements may differ.
Establishing the proper practices is the first step to maintaining human resources compliance, but don’t overlook the impact they can have on retaining your best people.
It may seem obvious, but don’t ignore an opportunity make employees feel valued. Acknowledging them for good work, and even encouraging employees to recognize one another can boost morale and help inspire a culture of achievement.

Prevent top talent from leaving by inviting them to share their opinions about projects, processes, even business strategy. You’ll not only make them feel more involved in the company, you’ll get input you may not have received otherwise.
Recognition can also come in the form of reward. Close early for a long weekend, a special lunch outing on the company dime, cash rewards, anything from small tokens to tickets to the big game are all tangible ways you can let people know their contributions are appreciated.
You can’t improve performance if you don’t seek input, internally and externally. Feedback can come from one-on-one discussions, facilitated group meetings, company surveys, and exit interviews. Everyone should have the chance to be heard. Companies achieve more by listening and acting on feedback from employees and customers.
Find ways to convey to your employees the importance of work/life balance. Review your family and medical leave policies and make necessary adjustments. Invite families to select company events. If possible, offer flexible work schedules.
Lead by example. Let your employees experience the effective communication practices and people skills you’d like to see. Provide training to managers and supervisors to help them develop into the kind of leaders your company needs.
Consider the different ways you can support employee development. What training would help employees develop skills that would help them to grow with the company? Can you connect employees with mentors? Do you have long term employees who can serve as onboarding mentors to new hires? Inviting employee involvement at conferences and association memberships enhances their understanding of your business and industry, cultivates connections, and can serve as a great motivator.
HR practices that support a positive workplace lead to company growth. For example, employees that want to be a part of your company and are invested in your mission are more productive, create better relationships with customers and are great brand advocates. Creating a culture that helps engaged employees thrive will only increase retention and create an environment that job seekers want to join.
The process of hiring and managing talent can create a few headaches. There’s a lot of information to digest, and legal consequences can impact growth. But how do you know where you stand and what to change?
If these areas need attention, a change in process may be the solution. It’s possible you’ve hit the tipping point where the ways things used to be done no longer support your current and future needs.
Simplifying and streamlining your processes while maintaining strong HR practices will free up you and your team to focus efforts on other ways to grow your business.
For nearly 30 years, Paycor has led the way in keeping businesses compliant by offering the right technology plus valuable expertise. We’ve cut our teeth in one of the most complex regulatory environment, and more than 30,000 clients trust us to protect their business from costly mistakes. If you’re struggling to keep up with the wide array of compliance regulations, or you’re looking for a partner to support your needs, we’d love to help. 
 Previous:
Next:
Stay up to date with the latest HR trends

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Employee satisfaction surveys are a great way to stay in tune with what your employees are thinking. Get real insights on how to engage and motivate your team.

        Article      
Read Time: 10 min
Employee burnout can impact work quality and morale. Discover the warning signs for burnout and how to prevent it in your workplace.

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Being an effective leader requires more than just technical knowledge. Create an environment where everyone can thrive and understand emotions in oneself and others.
HCM Software
HR + Payroll Software
Talent Management
Workforce Management
Employee Experience
Benefits Administration
Quick Links
Services + Support
855-565-3285
Talk to Sales
855-752-8564
© 2023 Paycor, Inc  |  Refer Paycor  |  Privacy Policy  |  1-800-501-9462 |
*Represents approximately 30,000 corporate clients covering 40,000 businesses employing people