2023 Payroll Compliance Checklist

As an employer, staying payroll compliant requires your full attention. Identify any gaps in your payroll compliance with our helpful list of questions.

Workforce Management
Last Updated: December 20, 2022 | Read Time: 10 min
Staying compliant with payroll laws requires your full attention. Not only do you have to monitor the local, state, and federal HR compliance guidelines for changes and updates; you must also stay on top of complex regulations and tax laws to ensure your systems are updated for each payroll run. Do you know where your organization stands? To help you identify any gaps, we’ve put together a quick list of questions to consider related to payroll compliance.
Questions to consider:
This act requires that employers verify the identity and employment eligibility of anyone hired to confirm that all new employees may legally work in the U.S. via completion of the Employment Eligibility Verification form (I-9).
Questions to consider:
The FSLA is a federal law that establishes minimum wage, overtime pay eligibility, recordkeeping and child labor standards. The law applies to full-time and part-time workers in the private sector and in federal, state and local governments.
Questions to Consider:
The Affordable Care Act (ACA) requires employers with 50 or more full-time equivalent employees to offer minimal essential health coverage at an affordable rate to all full-time employees (30+ hours) or face a penalty.
Questions to Consider:
The EEOC requires private employers with 100 or more employees and federal contractors with 50 or more employees to submit data for a specific pay period including the number of employees by race and sex as part of the EEO-1 Report.
Questions to Consider:
Paycor is the trusted compliance partner for more than 29,000 organizations nationwide. Our payroll processing and tax filing reduces errors and helps ensure compliance with federal and state regulations. From accurate HR, payroll and time solutions to expert support, Paycor helps you see around corners, so you don’t fall victim to compliance regulations or government audits.
Please note, this information is not intended to serve as legal advice, only as information your organization should consider when reviewing compliance regulations. We recommend that you consult with an attorney to discuss specific compliance questions that may affect your organization.
 Previous:
Next:
Stay up to date with the latest HR trends

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Employee satisfaction surveys are a great way to stay in tune with what your employees are thinking. Get real insights on how to engage and motivate your team.

        Article      
Read Time: 10 min
Employee burnout can impact work quality and morale. Discover the warning signs for burnout and how to prevent it in your workplace.

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Being an effective leader requires more than just technical knowledge. Create an environment where everyone can thrive and understand emotions in oneself and others.
HCM Software
HR + Payroll Software
Talent Management
Workforce Management
Employee Experience
Benefits Administration
Quick Links
Services + Support
855-565-3285
Talk to Sales
855-752-8564
© 2023 Paycor, Inc  |  Refer Paycor  |  Privacy Policy  |  1-800-501-9462 |
*Represents approximately 30,000 corporate clients covering 40,000 businesses employing people