Pay Equity and State-by-State Laws

Pay equity laws vary by state. Is your company compliant? Use our reference guide to find out!

Workforce Management
Last Updated: May 23, 2022 | Read Time: 28 min
When you’re managing payroll, it’s tough to keep track of—and maintain compliance with—federal, state and local law. This is certainly the case for pay equity laws, which differ between states, and even between cities and counties.
Women in the United States make approximately 82 cents for every $1 a man earns according to the U.S Census Bureau. Many states have acted by writing more specific bills into law related to pay transparency, retaliation and annual pay data reporting to help enforce equal pay practices and eliminate discrimination.
As of 2022, 42 states have enacted equal pay laws, acts or statutes; however, it’s important to note that all 49 states and the District of Columbia fall under The Equal Pay Act of 1963, which prohibits pay discrimination on the basis of sex. In recent years, many state legislatures have pushed stronger laws into action. Some of the more sophisticated laws include specifications about pay transparency and wage history to ensure no employers try to cut corners when it comes to pay equity. To help give you a quick view of each state’s laws, we’ve provided a state-by-state chart below.
We’re honored to help more than 29,000 customers stay compliant with federal and state equal pay regulations. Learn more about Paycor’s award-winning HCM platform here.
The information provided in our chart is for educational purposes only; it is not legal advice. Always check regulations to help ensure compliance.
 Previous:
Next:
Stay up to date with the latest HR trends

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Employee satisfaction surveys are a great way to stay in tune with what your employees are thinking. Get real insights on how to engage and motivate your team.

        Article      
Read Time: 10 min
Employee burnout can impact work quality and morale. Discover the warning signs for burnout and how to prevent it in your workplace.

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Being an effective leader requires more than just technical knowledge. Create an environment where everyone can thrive and understand emotions in oneself and others.
HCM Software
HR + Payroll Software
Talent Management
Workforce Management
Employee Experience
Benefits Administration
Quick Links
Services + Support
855-565-3285
Talk to Sales
855-752-8564
© 2023 Paycor, Inc  |  Refer Paycor  |  Privacy Policy  |  1-800-501-9462 |
*Represents approximately 30,000 corporate clients covering 40,000 businesses employing people