ICHRA Rules: What Are Individual Coverage HRAs?

An Individual Coverage Health Reimbursement Arrangement is now available for organizations of all sizes. See how an ICHRA can help your employees.

Benefits Administration
Last Updated: May 17, 2021 | Read Time: 6 min
Employees need options when it comes to covering the cost of healthcare. Group health insurance unfortunately doesn’t always work for everyone. When you offer new and nontraditional alternatives, you can retain individuals with unique situations that fall outside of the norm.
Recent healthcare reforms have provided employers with new options, including the ICHRA or Individual Coverage Health Reimbursement Arrangement, which is now available for organizations of all sizes. If you’re planning to provide an ICHRA to your employees, it’s important that you understand how the rules vary from traditional HRAs.
An ICHRA or Individual Coverage Health Reimbursement Arrangement allows businesses to offer employees a monthly tax-free allowance to buy individual health coverage and cover expenses for their unique needs. This enables employees to shop for insurance outside of an employer’s group health plan or when an employer does not offer health insurance at all.
The ICHRA was originally created in 2019 to help control costs and address ACA compliance for applicable large employers, but in January 2020 it became available for businesses of all sizes. (For more information, read IRS guidance.)
Unlike an HRA, an ICHRA allows for the reimbursement of individual insurance premiums. It’s also designed to work with individual insurance plans, while HRAs are often used for group health plans. The individual coverage plan requires that employees purchase insurance plans independently from the Health Insurance Marketplace/Exchange or outside of the Exchange, and submit proof of incurred expenses to their employer. The employer then pays the reimbursement directly to the employee. The reimbursements do not count towards employees’ taxable wages. Also, in an ICHRA, an employer can allow unused funds to roll over from year to year.
Employers can offer ICHRAs to any specific class of employees: full-time, part-time, seasonal, salaried, etc. The amounts offered may be increased for older workers or for workers with more dependents. An employer can offer group health plans to other classes of employees, but an employee is not eligible for an ICHRA if they are a part of the employer’s group health plan. In order to be eligible for an ICHRA, an employee must be covered by an individual health insurance plan.
Employers can contribute the amount of their choice to an employee’s ICHRA. If the individual’s premium costs are not covered by an ICHRA, the IRS has specific rules about what employers can allow employees to pay through a salary reduction arrangement.
As an employer, it’s your responsibility to provide a notice to eligible employees and inform them of how the individual coverage option affects the premium tax credit. The premium tax credit is a refundable tax credit designed to help eligible individuals and families with low or moderate income afford health insurance purchased through the Health Insurance Marketplace, also known as the Exchange. An employee (or any member of the employee’s family) cannot collect premium tax credits if they participate in the ICHRA.
Employers of any size can offer an ICHRA as long as they have one employee who isn’t a self-employed owner or the spouse of a self-employed owner. HRAs are only for employees, not self-employed individuals.
One of the main benefits of the ICHRA is to increase options for health insurance coverage, allowing workers to shop for plans that best meet their unique needs. This option also helps small employers who must pay large administrative costs to offer coverage to their employees. Additionally, an offer of an ICHRA counts as an offer of coverage under the ACA employer mandate.
It may seem like a chore to manage varying benefits and healthcare reimbursement arrangements, but Paycor can help. Paycor’s payroll system can accommodate employers who provide contributions to an individual coverage health reimbursement arrangement through the non-taxable earning HRA option. We also provide up-to-date ACA compliance tools you can trust including:
If you’d like to learn more about how these tools can help you offer an ICHRA and manage compliance, take a Paycor Product Tour today.
 Previous:
Next:
Stay up to date with the latest HR trends

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Employee satisfaction surveys are a great way to stay in tune with what your employees are thinking. Get real insights on how to engage and motivate your team.

        Article      
Read Time: 10 min
Employee burnout can impact work quality and morale. Discover the warning signs for burnout and how to prevent it in your workplace.

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Being an effective leader requires more than just technical knowledge. Create an environment where everyone can thrive and understand emotions in oneself and others.
HCM Software
HR + Payroll Software
Talent Management
Workforce Management
Employee Experience
Benefits Administration
Quick Links
Services + Support
855-565-3285
Talk to Sales
855-752-8564
© 2023 Paycor, Inc  |  Refer Paycor  |  Privacy Policy  |  1-800-501-9462 |
*Represents approximately 30,000 corporate clients covering 40,000 businesses employing people