What Is Benefits Administration?

Benefit Administration, typically a responsibility of Human Resources, is the process of creating, managing and updating an organization’s employee benefits program.

Benefits Administration
Last Updated:  March 7, 2019 | Read Time: 2 min
Benefit Administration is the process of creating, managing and updating an organization’s employee benefits program. Benefits administration typically falls under the responsibility of Human Resources and involves managing health insurance, retirement accounts, vacations, paid time off and parental leave.
Providing employees with the right mix of benefits is critical to attracting and retaining talent and creating engaged employees. Employees are less likely to look for another job when benefits fit their needs. Better benefits reduce stress and offer peace of mind that both the individual and their family is covered in case of emergency.
To help create a competitive benefits program, organizations often start by determining what kind of insurance coverage and copays the organization will offer. With a benefits program in place, employee benefit administrators or other HR personnel are tasked with enrolling new employees and ensuring all employees understand available plans.
For tips on how to improve employee benefits management, check out this article.
 Previous:
Next:
Stay up to date with the latest HR trends

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Employee satisfaction surveys are a great way to stay in tune with what your employees are thinking. Get real insights on how to engage and motivate your team.

        Article      
Read Time: 10 min
Employee burnout can impact work quality and morale. Discover the warning signs for burnout and how to prevent it in your workplace.

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Being an effective leader requires more than just technical knowledge. Create an environment where everyone can thrive and understand emotions in oneself and others.
HCM Software
HR + Payroll Software
Talent Management
Workforce Management
Employee Experience
Benefits Administration
Quick Links
Services + Support
855-565-3285
Talk to Sales
855-752-8564
© 2023 Paycor, Inc  |  Refer Paycor  |  Privacy Policy  |  1-800-501-9462 |
*Represents approximately 30,000 corporate clients covering 40,000 businesses employing people