How to Conduct Exit Interviews

For many companies the exit interview is an afterthought. But if utilized properly it can propel HR teams forward. Read best practices here.

Employee Experience
Last Updated: November 11, 2019 | Read Time: 6 min
In the world of human resources, the focus is always on a strong start. From finding that perfect candidate to conducting a spot-on interview, it’s all about the beginning. However, strong HR practices are not just about the first phase or hiring.
Inevitably employees quit, which kicks off the process of wrapping things up and conducting an exit interview. For many companies, the employee exit interview is an afterthought.
However, the exit interview is a powerful tool to consistently evolve and optimize company performance and culture. The exit interview is a rare opportunity to get honest and raw feedback about an organization’s effectiveness in many areas, from how closely a role matched the actual duties of a job, to how well leadership actually leads.
In this guide, we’ll outline exactly how to conduct an exit interview that will deliver valuable feedback to your organization.
The format of an exit interview is important. The two most common exit interview formats are in-person or questionnaire. Each format has pros and cons.
The obvious benefit of a questionnaire-based exit interview is that an employee can do it on their own time. When an employee is in the final two weeks of a role, they are usually quite busy transitioning work, so this could be more convenient.
However, a questionnaire exit interview may fall by the wayside because the employee is so busy during the final stretch. Also, in a questionnaire scenario, an employee may not feel as compelled to divulge rich, honest feedback. Plus many people simply don’t enjoy writing long-form answers, so you run the risk of receiving one-sentence replies, with very little usable information.
The face-to-face exit interview offers some distinct benefits. You end the employment in the same way it began, with the attention of an interview which shows professionalism and class. With a formal in-person exit interview you also receive more three-dimensional feedback. People are often more open during conversation and the detail provided is much more useful.
The drawback of an in-person exit interview is that it may feel like an obligation, which could negatively color the feedback provided. Also, when feedback is given in conversation, it is harder to track so you’ll need to consider a way to record or capture the interview content for analysis later on.
If you decide on a face-to-face exit interview, you will need to decide on the person who will administrate the interview.
Determine who will be the interviewer (manager, HR, etc)
For an effective exit interview, you will need a prepared list of questions. This will help organize the interview and save valuable time for both the interviewer and exiting employee.

Open the interview with an explanation of what an exit interview is. While the term “exit interview” is widely understood in the HR industry, many employees won’t know what it is or the significance of the exit interview.
Once you share that an interviewee’s responses will directly help the organization, this will make them feel valued and inspired to offer genuine, useful feedback.
Data is the hottest currency in business, and exit interview feedback is a goldmine of data. To really capitalize on an exit interview, you should apply the principles of data analytics.
First ensure consistent data collection, which is why it’s important to conduct interviews the same way each time. This applies to how the interview is conducted (in-person vs. questionnaire) and the types of questions. Of course, there will be exceptions to this rule, but the more you apply consistency to your exit interviews, the better the insights can be.
Next, you should create a process for analysis. It’s not enough to collect your exit interview information. You must actually review it, find key themes, identify action items, and implement them. If you do not have a process for exit interview feedback collection and analysis, think about leveraging your internal data experts. They likely have solid frameworks and methods for data analysis.
Finally, you should take action. As insights are uncovered from exit interviews, share the information formally with stakeholders and decision-makers. For example, if you receive feedback that indicates employee onboarding is not thorough enough, share this with managers and leadership. Formulate a plan to improve onboarding materials.
The HR department that puts as much thought into the hiring phase as they put into an employee’s last two weeks are at a major advantage. However, as discussed, many organizations sleep on the opportunity to fully-leverage this step in the human resources toolkit.
As you plan your initiatives for next quarter and next year, add a line item to analyze your current exit interview processes. A few simple tweaks could lead to measurable improvements in your company culture.

 Previous:
Next:
Stay up to date with the latest HR trends

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Employee satisfaction surveys are a great way to stay in tune with what your employees are thinking. Get real insights on how to engage and motivate your team.

        Article      
Read Time: 10 min
Employee burnout can impact work quality and morale. Discover the warning signs for burnout and how to prevent it in your workplace.

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Being an effective leader requires more than just technical knowledge. Create an environment where everyone can thrive and understand emotions in oneself and others.
HCM Software
HR + Payroll Software
Talent Management
Workforce Management
Employee Experience
Benefits Administration
Quick Links
Services + Support
855-565-3285
Talk to Sales
855-752-8564
© 2023 Paycor, Inc  |  Refer Paycor  |  Privacy Policy  |  1-800-501-9462 |
*Represents approximately 30,000 corporate clients covering 40,000 businesses employing people