Is Your Organization Ready for Employee Self-Service?

Employee self service allows the workforce to have access to their personal records. See how ESS technology can help your organization.

Employee Experience
Last Updated:  May 26, 2020 | Read Time: 10 min
At its core, employee self-service (ESS) gives workers access to their personal records and information. Through employee self-service portals (housed in HRIS systems), employees can change their contact and banking information, access their payroll, schedules, benefits enrollment and more, without HR being involved.



To many HR leaders, the empowerment of ESS means the golden age of HR has arrived. Instead of spending hours on administrative tasks, HR leaders can now focus on strategic initiatives like recruiting, retention and employee development. That’s why nearly 87% of organizations currently use ESS applications.
But what about the remaining 13%?
Here are three main reasons why some HR leaders are skeptical of automating HR processes and adopting ESS:
Fear: Employers are afraid to give employees too much control/access to HR data. Why? With the ability to change information directly in the system, many employers are worried workers could cause more problems by inputing wrong information. And without human oversight, errors could go undetected.
Reality: When employers give their people the ability change their personal information, organizations see a decrease in errors. After all who knows an employee better than the individual themselves?
Fear: Many HR leaders believe ESS increases the risk of a data breach or the chances of leaking sensitive employee data.
Reality: With ESS, employees only have access to their own personal information. Best-in-class solutions have built-in safety nets that prevent data leaks.
Fear: Some HR leaders believe ESS could replace or reduce the value of HR. Although a healthy dose of concern could be warranted, the definitive answer is: this will not happen.
Reality: Employee self-service isn’t designed to replace HR, but rather support HR departments and help employees take care of their more-routine tasks and requests.
Think about this:
On average, HR leaders get more than 1,000 pay-related questions every year from employees. And that’s just the tip of the iceberg. From benefits enrollment and scheduling to onboarding and training, HR leaders can find themselves overwhelmed by answering routine questions. ESS is designed to give you time back so you can focus on what matters most, being a strategic HR leader and impacting your bottom line.


How do you know if an employee self-service solution would benefit your organization? Well if you share the common symptoms below, you should probably start conversations with the leaders at your organization:


The benefits of employee self-service go far beyond saving time. Here are 7 reasons why nearly 87% of organizations leverage ESS.
ESS empowers HR leaders to be more productive. Did you know that nearly 50% of HR department’s time is spend processing employee information and answering questions? By leveraging ESS, leaders can save money by ensuring compliance with information accuracy, tackling more strategic initiatives and reducing workforce related costs.
With ESS, HR leaders eliminate wait times for basic requests to be completed, such as W-2s, benefit enrollment and training certification statuses. ESS empowers employees to access their own information at their fingertips, anytime and anywhere.
An HRIS with ESS will help eliminate duplicate data entry and increase data accuracy by empowering employees to confirm or change their own personal information.
This includes:
Open Enrollment for many HR leaders is a nightmare. But it doesn’t have to be. With HRIS technology and ESS, workers can enroll in benefit plans, like dental and vision, HSAs & FSAs and retirement plans. HR leaders no longer need to track down information and answer routine questions that employees could easily answer themselves.
Many HR leaders are responsible for filing expense reports on behalf of employees. But ESS shifts the responsibility to employees. Managers and HR leaders can review and approve expense reports to ensure accuracy and compliance.
ESS technology enables HR leaders to track employee tardiness and absenteeism. It also allows employees to request time off, swap shifts with other employees and track their banked PTO.
Finally, the biggest benefit of them all: ESS improves efficiency. Consider all the tasks that could be completed by employees:
ESS gives HR leaders time back so they can recruit, control labor costs, manage people, ensure compliance and improve employee experiences.


Whether you’re already partnered with an HR & payroll provider or browsing the market, your employee self-service solutions should offer these must-have features:
This must-have feature allows employees to print or access their paystub (or any historical paystub) at any time.
With employee self-service technology, your employees should be able to request time off from their phones, desktop or kiosks. In the same breath, HR leaders and managers should have the ability to approve or deny requests from any device.
Only partner with an HR & payroll provider that has the technology to verify punch locations and allow admins to set precise location maps to ensure employees are punching in or near desired work locations.
This ESS feature empowers employees to correct errors in their attendance should they arise. Keep in mind that employees can’t make changes without manager approval.
Have policies and handbooks that need to be reviewed and signed? ESS allows new hires view important company documents and sign them electronically.
Allow employees to drop, pick up or request shift changes in real time. With intuitive drag and drop functionality, employees can swap shifts with just a few clicks.
With ESS-based onboarding, employees can:
This feature instantly notifies users and admins of any errors or discrepancies to avoid costly compliance issues or incorrect time cards. With the right provider you can also set up alerts for certifications or trainings that are about to expire, shift changes, anniversaries, birthdays and so much more.
Paycor creates HCM software for leaders who want to make a difference. Our Human Capital Management (HCM) platform modernizes every aspect of people management, from the way you recruit, onboard and develop people, to the way you pay and retain them. But what really sets us apart is our focus on business leaders. For 30 years, we’ve been listening to and partnering with leaders, so we know what they need: HR technology that saves time, powerful analytics that provide actionable insights and dedicated support from HR experts. That’s why more than 30,000 medium & small businesses trust Paycor to help them solve problems and achieve their goals.
 Previous:
Next:
Stay up to date with the latest HR trends

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Employee satisfaction surveys are a great way to stay in tune with what your employees are thinking. Get real insights on how to engage and motivate your team.

        Article      
Read Time: 10 min
Employee burnout can impact work quality and morale. Discover the warning signs for burnout and how to prevent it in your workplace.

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Being an effective leader requires more than just technical knowledge. Create an environment where everyone can thrive and understand emotions in oneself and others.
HCM Software
HR + Payroll Software
Talent Management
Workforce Management
Employee Experience
Benefits Administration
Quick Links
Services + Support
855-565-3285
Talk to Sales
855-752-8564
© 2023 Paycor, Inc  |  Refer Paycor  |  Privacy Policy  |  1-800-501-9462 |
*Represents approximately 30,000 corporate clients covering 40,000 businesses employing people