How To Make The Workplace Fun

As an HR professional, your role in making your workplace more fun and relaxed can bring some fun to your own job. Learn tips from Paycor!

Employee Experience
Last Updated:  February 5, 2019 | Read Time: 5 min
We all know that work can be a drag sometimes. It’s work after all—it’s
something we all have to do and it takes up most of our waking hours
every Monday to Friday (if we’re lucky) and is set on an endlessly
repeating loop. It can be stressful, the routine can get boring, and it
can be hard to actually want to go to work at times.
Can a workplace even be fun, then? Is that concept antithetical to doing
your job? It doesn’t have to be! In fact, as an HR professional, your
role in making your workplace more fun and relaxed can bring some fun to
your own job. Below are some methods to make your workplace more fun and enjoyable.
 
Your workplace should always be a reflection of your company’s values
and ethos—you can’t compromise your corporate identity just for the sake
of being loose, relaxed place to work. That being said, that doesn’t
mean your corporate culture has to necessarily be stuffy and rigid
either.
Start with an eye for aesthetics—maybe some redecorating could be done
to make your work spaces more pleasing to the eye. Add some color,
install some art, and make the place sing with the colors and imagery
that your company brand employs.
Then add some personality. If the office is appropriate for it and
allergies aren’t a problem, an office pet is always a nice perk. Got an
extra meeting room that never gets used? Perhaps a game room or a
café-themed group room could be just the right addition.
These are all just examples—only you know what strikes the right balance
of fun and professional. Whatever you add to the workplace needs to be
in service of the culture you’re trying to foster in your office.
 
 
The thing which most often drags people down during a workday is the
routine of it all. Start with the time-sensitive tasks, move on to other
work, and hope that lunch or the end of the day comes before you
completely lose your focus.
To help perk up tired or bored minds in the office, use on-site events
to break up the tedium. Google, for example, uses quick challenges or
puzzles to keep their employees engaged and sharp. Many places have
periods of the day or exercise, calisthenics, or yoga.
Better yet, give your employees surprises. A simple means is by
providing a communal lunch every so often or having a mid-afternoon
coffee break with some entertainment or a guest speaker. Ask your
employees for suggestions and use the best ones as an unexpected treat
later on in the month or year.
 
 
Outings are a great way for employees to bond without the specter of
work looming over them, but they’re not for everybody. Happy hours are a
good example—they can be a great source of camaraderie but they can be
excluding to those who don’t want to go to a bar and always have the
unfortunate potential of someone having one too many. A helpful hint: if
you’re going to have an employee happy hour, make sure it’s at a venue
with plenty of food.
But, off-site perks don’t have to be limited to a five o’clock cocktail. Think
about fun events or field trips to do on a half-day Friday. Use the
resources around your office in your town or city for ideas—maybe try a
trip to the ballpark during the summer or a picnic in nature during the
springtime. And a couple times a year, have big company-wide events like
an Office Olympics.
However you choose to do so, infusing some fun in the workplace not only
keeps your employees happier during the workday, it also boosts your
ability to attract and retain top talent. And on
top of all that, you may find that you like your own job even better as
a result.
Want to have the time to run your business and work on improving or
defining your culture?
Contact
us to learn more about what partnering with Paycor can do.
Sources: Fast Company, Inc., Entrepreneur.com
 Previous:
Next:
Stay up to date with the latest HR trends

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Employee satisfaction surveys are a great way to stay in tune with what your employees are thinking. Get real insights on how to engage and motivate your team.

        Article      
Read Time: 10 min
Employee burnout can impact work quality and morale. Discover the warning signs for burnout and how to prevent it in your workplace.

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Being an effective leader requires more than just technical knowledge. Create an environment where everyone can thrive and understand emotions in oneself and others.
HCM Software
HR + Payroll Software
Talent Management
Workforce Management
Employee Experience
Benefits Administration
Quick Links
Services + Support
855-565-3285
Talk to Sales
855-752-8564
© 2023 Paycor, Inc  |  Refer Paycor  |  Privacy Policy  |  1-800-501-9462 |
*Represents approximately 30,000 corporate clients covering 40,000 businesses employing people