Employer Student Loan Repayment Program (SLRA) - What You Need To Know

A Student Loan Repayment Program is a benefit employers can use to both retain and attract new talent into the pipeline. See how SLRAs function, here.

Benefits Administration
Last Updated: May 26, 2021 | Read Time: 6 min
A Student Loan Repayment Assistance (SLRA) program is way for employers to help their employees by contributing to their student loan repayments. In an increasingly competitive business environment, and with student loan debt rising nationally, SLRA programs are a powerful tool to attract and retain new talent. This benefit is a great addition to other perks like better health and dental insurance, generous vacation days, 401k programs and company gyms.
Student loans have exceeded $1.56 trillion and are the second largest debt category for Americans, second only to mortgages. Many companies are finding that offering an SLRA program can be an effective tool for recruiting college graduates. In 2015, only 3% of employers offered such a benefit to their employees, according to SHRM. By 2019, that number had more than doubled to 8% and is expected to rise to more than 30% by 2021.
One of the provisions in the March 2020 Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security (CARES) Act allowed employers, through Section 127 of the Internal Revenue Code, to make contributions of up to $5,250 per employee toward specified education expenses without impacting the employee’s taxable income. The provision was originally scheduled to run only through the end of 2020. Then, in December, President Trump signed the Consolidated Appropriations Act (CAA), which extended this provision through 2025.
However, in order to take full advantage of the provision, employers will need to create a formal educational assistance program that incorporates certain key features:
When deciding whether or not to adopt an SLRA program, businesses should consider all of the benefits and costs.
High employee turnover is a concern for most businesses. The cost of losing an employee has been estimated at anywhere from 16% of their salary to more than 200% for highly skilled positions.
The Bureau of Labor and Statistics looked at job tenure based on age. They found that workers between the ages of 55 and 64 had a median job tenure of 10 years while those between 25 and 34 had less three.
Moreover, a Gallup survey found that 60% of currently-employed millennials said they were open to different job opportunities and 21% of them claimed to have just changed jobs within the past year.
One important benefit of an SLRA program for employers is reducing turnover by tying the perk to an employment commitment from their new hires.
Whether you handle the administration of your SLRA program in house or through a third party, it is important to weigh the costs against the benefits. Your leadership team will need to determine how much funding they are going to commit to the program. They will also need to determine how they will administer any claw-back provision if an employee fails to uphold his or her obligations.
Be aware of the hidden cost of missed opportunities. As SLRA programs become more popular, it will be impossible to calculate the number of quality employees who may never even apply at your company if you don’t offer the benefit.
The extended SLRA provision of the CARES Act stands a good chance of becoming permanent and even expanded. This will have a considerable impact on what types of SLRA programs employers offer and how they will be administered. In this dynamic environment, HR professionals should be alert for new or adapted legislation.
Paycor builds HR solutions for leaders. With Paycor, you can modernize every aspect of people management, from the way you recruit, onboard and develop your team, to the way you pay and retain them. See how Paycor can help the leaders of your organization solve the problems of today and tomorrow.
 Previous:
Next:
Stay up to date with the latest HR trends

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Employee satisfaction surveys are a great way to stay in tune with what your employees are thinking. Get real insights on how to engage and motivate your team.

        Article      
Read Time: 10 min
Employee burnout can impact work quality and morale. Discover the warning signs for burnout and how to prevent it in your workplace.

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Being an effective leader requires more than just technical knowledge. Create an environment where everyone can thrive and understand emotions in oneself and others.
HCM Software
HR + Payroll Software
Talent Management
Workforce Management
Employee Experience
Benefits Administration
Quick Links
Services + Support
855-565-3285
Talk to Sales
855-752-8564
© 2023 Paycor, Inc  |  Refer Paycor  |  Privacy Policy  |  1-800-501-9462 |
*Represents approximately 30,000 corporate clients covering 40,000 businesses employing people