How to Achieve Diversity in the Workplace

Organizations must be intentional in addressing diversity in the workplace.  Use this guide to get started in the right direction.

Talent Management
Last Updated:  June 17, 2020 | Read Time: 17 min
Cultural Diversity | Organizational Diversity | Diversity in Recruiting | Elevate Onboarding
Having tough conversations about diversity and working towards a more inclusive environment is a part of any successful business.
But what, exactly, is diversity? We define diversity as understanding, accepting, and valuing differences in races, ethnicities, genders, ages and more. Diversity can also include recognizing and respecting differences in education, skill sets, abilities and experiences.
In order to address diversity in the workplace, you have to be intentional. You have to get comfortable with being uncomfortable and accept that achieving diversity isn’t easy. But it will be worth it in the long run—a study by researchers at MIT found diverse teams beat teams comprised of like-minded individuals every time (on issues such as office satisfaction, cooperation and morale).
Below you’ll find some helpful hints and tips for improving your organization’s commitment to diversity and inclusion—use it as a starting point to guide you in the right direction.
The first step in making diversity and inclusion a priority at your organization is to get the executive team on board. Making diversity a core value of your company is a mindful shift and getting even small initiatives off the ground will be much more likely to succeed with support from leadership.
This two-pronged approach of storytelling with data can help you prepare messaging that supports your focus on strategically improving diversity and inclusion at your company. Although getting investments from leadership might be easier said than done, it’s a great first step in the right direction.
Companies typically start the conversation on solving diversity problems with “How do we hire more minorities?” But many successful diversity initiatives don’t start with hiring at all, but rather with taking better care of the employees you already have (inclusion). A little self-reflection and effort to be improve can go a long way.
How Flexible Should You Be?
Evaluating and improving your recruitment process can make a huge impact in the types of candidates you attract. Embed inclusive best practices into each step, from the job descriptions and stock photos posted on your website to the bias your hiring managers bring to the table.
“Work hard, play hard” is not a culture. At least not one that will attract underrepresented groups. Instead, consider highlighting some of the inclusive values and benefits your company offers. Use gender-neutral language that would appeal to people from a variety of backgrounds. Not sure how your current pages and practices measure up? Ask employees or consider a post-interview survey for candidates. 
Stop describing who a candidate should be and start describing the jobs to be done. Language that focuses too much on personality traits and not enough on the role and responsibilities can discourage diverse candidates. In addition, listing too many specific requirements can dissuade candidates who may be more than capable of doing the job.
(Source: Hewlett Packard study). 
We all have biases. Unconscious or not, the most important thing we can do is acknowledge and check those biases. Start an open dialogue with hiring managers about how to avoid bias during interviews. Our subconscious often equates stereotypical images to the real deal. But, fitting a certain stereotype (like a white male computer science grad) doesn’t have anything to do with the quality of work an individual can deliver.
According to Glassdoor, 45% of people think that hiring managers are in the best position to increase diversity (Compared to HR or the CEO).
While they can be a great resource for attracting smart and trustworthy candidates, referrals can be extremely detrimental to hiring diverse candidates. Our friends, family, and colleagues tend to share our experiences, education, demographics, and cultural backgrounds. A healthy referral program can quickly lead to a homogenous workplace. Consider setting a benchmark or limit for what percentage of your new hires can come from referrals.
Studies by the Social Mobility Commission show numerous industries are failing to hire talented young people from less advantaged backgrounds because they primarily recruit from a small pool of elite universities and hire those who fit in with the culture. If you recruit from local colleges or universities, consider recruiting from high school programs or technical programs as well.
Audit Your Job Descriptions by Asking:

Clearly define what diversity and inclusion means to your company and incorporate that message into your onboarding process or materials. Everyone who joins your organization should be aware of your goals and commitment to building an inclusive workplace. Starting off on the right foot helps new hires feel comfortable speaking up if their experience down the road doesn’t align with those values.
An inclusive culture doesn’t force individuals to fit into the existing culture, it evolves to incorporate new hires and their unique perspectives. Teach managers how to accommodate different communication styles and ensure existing processes are inclusive. Provide recommendations for new hire welcome events or team building activities and locations. Think beyond happy hours (which are not inclusive to those who may not drink for medical, religious or personal reasons)! 
If your company offers a welcome package or branded item for new hires, make sure it’s something everyone would like or use. Consider items that could be enjoyed by new hires of all cultures, genders or abilities.
Whether it’s a direct message, email inbox, mailbox or office hours, new hires should know where they can comfortably share feedback and ideas about the company’s culture or commitment to diversity and inclusion.
The research and recommendations in this guide are a great starting point for helping you strategically approach diversity and inclusion at your organization. At Paycor, we’re committed to building products to help you tackle the challenges that matter most. Here’s how:
Diversity-Focused Dashboards in Paycor Analytics Analytics offers insight into your organization’s diversity. See data on gender diversity and leadership, minority diversity and leadership, veterans and more. Drill down on how your organization is retaining women and minorities. Benchmark against the latest EEOC data and get the data needed to help you launch strategic recruitment and retention programs.
Interview Scorecards in Paycor Recruiting Use scorecards to standardize your interview evaluation process and eliminate group-think. Although they may feel comfortable and conversational, unstructured interviews can quickly result in bias and irrelevant information. Using a uniform scorecard tool for reviewers to evaluate candidates will make your hiring process more equitable and efficient.
Paid Job Postings with Career Cast Diversity in Paycor Recruiting Purchase job postings via Career Cast Diversity to easily share your open positions within a career community for women, black, Hispanic, Asian and LGBTQIA individuals. It’s a simple boost in visibility that can help you diversify your candidate pipeline.
Paycor creates HR software for leaders who want to make a difference in the lives of their employees and to their company’s bottom line. You’re passionate about learning. You want to make decisions informed by deep knowledge of your business. Your efforts have the biggest impact on employee engagement. And if there’s a power user of the HCM platform, it’s you.
Ready to get started? Let’s take a tour of Paycor’s products.
 Previous:
Next:
Stay up to date with the latest HR trends

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Employee satisfaction surveys are a great way to stay in tune with what your employees are thinking. Get real insights on how to engage and motivate your team.

        Article      
Read Time: 10 min
Employee burnout can impact work quality and morale. Discover the warning signs for burnout and how to prevent it in your workplace.

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Being an effective leader requires more than just technical knowledge. Create an environment where everyone can thrive and understand emotions in oneself and others.
HCM Software
HR + Payroll Software
Talent Management
Workforce Management
Employee Experience
Benefits Administration
Quick Links
Services + Support
855-565-3285
Talk to Sales
855-752-8564
© 2023 Paycor, Inc  |  Refer Paycor  |  Privacy Policy  |  1-800-501-9462 |
*Represents approximately 30,000 corporate clients covering 40,000 businesses employing people