Lunch Break Laws By State

Does your state require employers give workers lunch breaks? Find out the regulations on lunch break laws and rest periods here.

Employee Experience
Last Updated: March 1, 2022 | Read Time: 15 min
Most employers provide their employees with a paid or unpaid lunch break and some provide additional rest break periods. But did you know that breaks aren’t required by law? Federal law, anyway. The Fair Labor Standards Act (FLSA), the law that governs wages and hours, does not mandate that employers provide meal or rest breaks to employees. Like many other federal laws in the human resources space, some states have stepped in to bridge the gap.
The federal law dictates that if an employee gets meal or rest breaks, the company does not have to pay them for that time unless:
To add to the complexity around the legality of mandatory rest and meal breaks, union collective bargaining agreements can also provide for breaks even in states that don’t require them. For example, depending on the particular collective bargaining agreement, an employee might take a 30-minute unpaid lunch break and two paid 10-minute breaks during an 8-hour shift.
To help employers, we’ve created a chart and table explaining meal break laws at work for every state. Watch out, though: Some states’ laws apply only to employees who are minors. Check states’ laws for additional provisions and exemptions. All hours worked must be consecutive.
Meal breaks are typically unpaid and not included in your work time. Your employer can’t force you to work during this break and shouldn’t interrupt your break with phone calls or work assignments. If they do, you might be able to recover to payment for the time you spent working. But, as with a lot of things, there’s an exception to the rule. If you’re the only employee on staff you might be requested to perform work duties, but this requires your agreement. If you request an uninterrupted break, your employer has to provide it.
An employer cannot force an employee to take a break; however, when an employee refuses break or meal time, this should be documented.
Federal law does not require meal or coffee breaks, but dictates that if an employee gets meal or rest breaks, the company does not have to pay them for that time unless:
The number of breaks an employee gets for an 8-hour shift depends on the state or industry the employee works in.
Paycor is not a legal, tax, benefit, accounting or investment advisor. All communication from Paycor should be confirmed by your company’s legal, tax, benefit, accounting or investment advisor before making any decisions.
 Previous:
Next:
Stay up to date with the latest HR trends

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Employee satisfaction surveys are a great way to stay in tune with what your employees are thinking. Get real insights on how to engage and motivate your team.

        Article      
Read Time: 10 min
Employee burnout can impact work quality and morale. Discover the warning signs for burnout and how to prevent it in your workplace.

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Being an effective leader requires more than just technical knowledge. Create an environment where everyone can thrive and understand emotions in oneself and others.
HCM Software
HR + Payroll Software
Talent Management
Workforce Management
Employee Experience
Benefits Administration
Quick Links
Services + Support
855-565-3285
Talk to Sales
855-752-8564
© 2023 Paycor, Inc  |  Refer Paycor  |  Privacy Policy  |  1-800-501-9462 |
*Represents approximately 30,000 corporate clients covering 40,000 businesses employing people