Essential Business Letter (Template)

With many states on partial lockdown, only essential employees can travel. See what that means, and get free templates for your team.


Last Updated:  November 20, 2020 | Read Time: 6 min
As communities across the country see rising rates of Covid-19, local lockdowns are once again a consideration for many businesses. In certain areas, most businesses may be forced to temporarily shut their doors or move to remote work—only “essential businesses” will be unaffected. Knowing what counts as an essential business (and being able to prove it) is therefore essential.
Back in March, the Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency (CISA, overseen by the Department of Homeland Security) issued guidance on what business count as critical infrastructure. Some businesses are obviously essential—hospitals, pharmacies and law enforcement. The list is extensive—other essential businesses include stores selling supplies which allow people to work from home, media organizations and certain financial institutions.
However, CISA guidance is not mandatory, and what counts as an essential business will often be a judgement call at a local level. Depending on the state or locality, essential businesses can also include marijuana dispensaries, liquor stores and breweries.
Remember, even in an essential business, any employee who can do their job remotely should be allowed to do so. This reduces crowding on the streets and in the workplace, and ultimately makes things safer for everyone in the community. For those who can’t work remotely, companies should do their best to create a safe work environment and always encourage social distancing at work.
There may also be parts of an essential business that are deemed non-essential. For instance, in many states restaurants can continue to operate but can only provide delivery service. So, while chefs will be counted as essential employees, servers may not.
That’s why it’s important to be clear to all employees whether your business is essential and whether they will be counted as essential employees. If possible this should be done before any shelter-in-place or similar lockdown is announced, so that employees can take the necessary steps to prepare.
If your status as an essential or non-essential business is unclear to you, reach out to your local authorities for guidance.
An essential business letter has two main purposes:
While this is definitely time to over-communicate with employees to reassure them about their roles and what’s required of them, it can also be helpful to give them official confirmation of their status as an essential employee. As employees all across the country are advised to stay home whenever possible, an Essential Business Letter can offer useful proof of the importance of an employee continuing to come to work. 
While not the case currently, if states enforce more severe procedures it is possible that employees may be asked to provide evidence that they work for essential businesses. It’s also important to provide some sort of contact details, so law enforcement can contact the relevant company to verify that the letter is genuine. 
Here’s a checklist of what an essential business letter needs to include:
SMB leaders have a lot on their plates right now. To help you out, Paycor is sharing an Essential Business Letter Template which can be adapted to the specific circumstances of your business.
Once downloaded, you can easily edit the language as required.
 Previous:
Next:
Stay up to date with the latest HR trends
HCM Software
HR + Payroll Software
Talent Management
Workforce Management
Employee Experience
Benefits Administration
Quick Links
Services + Support
855-565-3285
Talk to Sales
855-752-8564
© 2023 Paycor, Inc  |  Refer Paycor  |  Privacy Policy  |  1-800-501-9462 |
*Represents approximately 30,000 corporate clients covering 40,000 businesses employing people