What is On-Demand Pay? Key Benefits to Employees and Employers

Millions of adults live paycheck to paycheck. The 2 week payday cycle isn’t working. Read why On-demand pay give workers peace of mind and positively impacts business. 

Workforce Management
Last Updated: September 16, 2021 | Read Time: 5 min
Between the rising cost of living expenses, healthcare costs and other emergencies, many Americans are running a race with finances that just can’t be won. We need money, and more of it – yesterday! Three in four people reported a personal experience with financial insecurity (Commonwealth). More than 125 million U.S. adults live paycheck to paycheck (LendingClub), and surprisingly, many of those consumers made more than $100K per year. Additionally, 40% of Americans could not handle an unexpected expense of more than $400 without credit (Federal Reserve).
For cash-strapped Americans, the two-week standard payday cycle just isn’t working anymore, which is why many employers are considering giving workers access to earned wages through a new flexible payment option called on-demand pay.
On-demand pay is a method of paying employees their wages as they earn them. This method deviates from a traditional weekly or monthly payday cycle. When employees have access to some or all of their earned wages, they can pay bills on time and better manage expenses without the use of expensive financial products including payday loans, pawn shop loans, check cashing services or money orders.
Most employers do not manually calculate payroll in real time, which is why on-demand pay is formally executed through an HCM provider or payroll administrator. Using advanced cloud-based technology, on-demand pay providers can calculate how much an employee is owed in real time every day, after tax of course, and then offer some or all of that amount to the employee prior to payday. Some providers charge a per-pay-period fee but it is often very low as they are simply providing earned wages with low risk involved. Employees who want to avoid banks altogether can also opt to have their wages dispersed on a payment card.
Employees aren’t the only ones who benefit from on-demand pay. Employers also stand to gain from offering this payment option to their employees.
Financial Wellness = ProductivityMore than 77% of employers reported plans to offer support for employees’ major financial decisions, in a recent Fidelity survey. That’s because employers have known for decades that if you support employees through major life issues, you will create a healthy, productive workforce. When workers do not have to stress about finances, they can perform better at work. On-demand pay gives workers peace of mind over their finances which positively impacts the business.
Recruitment and RetentionThe novelty of on-demand pay also provides a competitive advantage in the war on talent. Workers who were surveyed about whether they would rather have access to on-demand pay or get paid more preferred on-demand pay.
Improving TurnoverAny fees associated with on-demand pay are insignificant in comparison to fees associated with turnover. A McDonald’s restaurant owner who offers an on-demand pay service to employees was able to improve turnover by 10 percentage points (USA Today). 
Paycor builds HR software for leaders. Instead of paying extra for technology that meets your unique needs, we’ve built OnDemand Pay directly into our payroll solution. It is available for Paycor customers at zero cost to employers.
Paycor’s OnDemand Pay was built for HR leaders in the restaurant, long-term care and manufacturing industries looking to decrease turnover and offer employees more flexible payment options. With OnDemand Pay, employees can access their wages when they want, budget for expenses and receive free access to financial education.
 Previous:
Next:
Stay up to date with the latest HR trends

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Employee satisfaction surveys are a great way to stay in tune with what your employees are thinking. Get real insights on how to engage and motivate your team.

        Article      
Read Time: 10 min
Employee burnout can impact work quality and morale. Discover the warning signs for burnout and how to prevent it in your workplace.

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Being an effective leader requires more than just technical knowledge. Create an environment where everyone can thrive and understand emotions in oneself and others.
HCM Software
HR + Payroll Software
Talent Management
Workforce Management
Employee Experience
Benefits Administration
Quick Links
Services + Support
855-565-3285
Talk to Sales
855-752-8564
© 2023 Paycor, Inc  |  Refer Paycor  |  Privacy Policy  |  1-800-501-9462 |
*Represents approximately 30,000 corporate clients covering 40,000 businesses employing people