Corporate Culture Examples: Types and Ways To Improve It

In this article, we’ll explain the types and give some examples of real-life company cultures. Find out the ways to improve your current culture here.

Employee Experience
Last Updated: January 25, 2022 | Read Time: 8 min
We spend more time with our work family than with our families at home. That’s why HR leaders care so much about company culture. They know culture is more than snacks in breakrooms, motivational posters, ping pong tables. But what exactly is corporate culture? 
Corporate culture is created when the people in an organization share the same values, ethics, attitudes, standards and beliefs and those principles are integrated into an organization’s goals, strategies, structure, and approaches to conducting business. As you consider what it takes to build a positive company culture, take a few notes from these successful real-life corporate culture examples.
While there are several definitions of corporate culture or organizational culture, Kim Cameron and Robert Quinn from the University of Michigan have defined four of the most popular types. 
So, what did we learn? Well, for starters, there’s no one-size-fits-all culture. What works for a tiny, agile start-up might not work for a family-owned manufacturing business with 500 employees. To see what company culture looks like in the real world, look at companies that consistently win recognition for being the “best places to work.”
“Best Places to Work” awards celebrate employers with the most engaged and collaborative workforces. 
These and other companies have found success by tying their missions and visions with operational and management philosophies that permeate the entire organization and engage their employees.
According to a 2020 report by SHRM, the Society for Human Resource Management, toxic workplaces cost US businesses billions. In their survey, nearly half of the employees responded that they had thought about leaving their current employer because of company culture issues. Almost one in five respondents left a job for precisely that reason within the last five years.
Positive workplaces with healthy corporate cultures benefit from: 
According to a recent study, Glassdoor found that companies form great cultures when a clear mission connects employees’ daily work with positive culture change and a broader social purpose. High-quality, competent senior leaders who inspire and provide employees with clearly defined pathways for career advancement make job roles a journey rather than a dead-end.
Paycor Pulse helps HR leaders better understand the employee experience with short, frequent employee surveys that are easy to complete and even easier to measure and analyze. By going beyond the annual engagement surveys, leaders can quickly acknowledge any corporate culture issue and make efforts to amend them immediately.
 Previous:
Next:
Stay up to date with the latest HR trends

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Employee satisfaction surveys are a great way to stay in tune with what your employees are thinking. Get real insights on how to engage and motivate your team.

        Article      
Read Time: 10 min
Employee burnout can impact work quality and morale. Discover the warning signs for burnout and how to prevent it in your workplace.

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Being an effective leader requires more than just technical knowledge. Create an environment where everyone can thrive and understand emotions in oneself and others.
HCM Software
HR + Payroll Software
Talent Management
Workforce Management
Employee Experience
Benefits Administration
Quick Links
Services + Support
855-565-3285
Talk to Sales
855-752-8564
© 2023 Paycor, Inc  |  Refer Paycor  |  Privacy Policy  |  1-800-501-9462 |
*Represents approximately 30,000 corporate clients covering 40,000 businesses employing people