How HR Solutions Help HR Teams Save Time

Human resource teams need to gain efficiencies in their workday. Read how HR solutions offer technology that is key to success.

Employee Experience
Last Updated: May 17, 2021 | Read Time: 6 min
HR teams have never been more important—or had less time. The buck stops with HR when it comes to keeping employees safe in the workplace and keeping them engaged when remote. The problem is, increased responsibility doesn’t mean that there’s any less admin work to take care of. The challenge is to maximize the amount of time spent on the stuff that really matters.
The reality is, this isn’t a new problem. Paycor research has shown that 70% of HR teams’ time is spent on inefficient admin tasks, some of which are still paper-based. Finding ways to reduce time spent on transactional and operational HR tasks gives the best performing HR teams a competitive advantage.
It means extra time each day HR leaders can spend thinking about the big picture—how to supercharge employee engagement, what benefits look like for remote teams and, most importantly of all, how to keep employees, and their communities, safe.
This requires streamlining whatever processes and tasks you can, with the help of technology. Paycor’s HR solution helps you save time while also boosting engagement, improving compliance practices and offering actionable insights into how your entire workforce operates.
HR technology is broad—covering everything from applicant tracking to staff scheduling, engagement surveys to payroll. But you shouldn’t forget about the core HR solution, offering tools to better manage employees and how they interact with your organization.
This includes managing employees’ information, their performance, goals and any coaching. It can be as simply as offering reminders on their birthday (and what they might like as a gift). It’s also important for compliance, with tracking and storage of documents and certifications. And you can even catalog and track assets all in one place.
HR Leaders can truly go paperless with Paycor Forms which frees HR from the cumbersome burden of printing, scanning, and collecting paper based forms. Paycor Forms digitizes the entire document management process by allowing HR Leaders to easily create, assign and store digital forms directly in the system.
It’s not just about doing HR admin quicker, though: it’s also about offering self-service tools so managers and employees can interact with your HR system without administrative bottlenecks.
Finally—with these efficiencies and synergies, HR teams can think more strategically, aided by the comprehensive analytics tools that an HR solution provides.
Now, let’s look in more detail at 3 key ways that Paycor HR helps saves HR teams time:
Often it’s not the admin itself that takes up so much time, it’s unnecessary back-and-forth. This is where workflows come in—by automating these processes, HR teams can speed up outcomes even while reducing the time they have to spend tracking progress.
Take terminations as an example—when an employee leaves the company, many people throughout the organization need to be notified, give approval or complete some action. Relevant supervisors will need to give approval, managers of separate teams should be informed while Payroll and IT may need to retrieve a laptop and other assets.
Paycor HR allows HR teams to configure these processes and assign tasks which the system will then track, and offer reminders for. When one approval is completed, whoever needs to take action next will be notified. Workflows can be applied to all sorts of HR tasks, including tracking important dates like when certificates expire. Rather than HR teams having to track all certifications manually, the system will send notifications when action needs to be taken.

Performance reviews are another admin task that can take up far too much time for HR teams, if they aren’t done right. Paycor allows you to efficiently manage and oversee performance reviews across your entire organization, without having to track and follow up every step of the way.
We offer customizable online forms, weighted scoring and side-by-side feedback. However frequently you want to set reviews, HR just needs to create and assign the task and leave the rest up to managers and employees, who will be notified when they need to produce or acknowledge feedback.

Analytics is where time-saving becomes money-saving. Paycor Analytics gives HR leaders the tools they need to not only understand how organizations are really performing but what changes are needed to improve. Dive deep into the reasons you keep (or lose) your top talent, analyze your labor cost and how it’s changing and make sure you are meeting your goals for organizational diversity and pay equity.
You’ll have the tools to see and easily understand the data that matters, giving HR the ability to make informed business decisions that really impact the bottom line. This means that not only is your HR solution saving you time but giving you the power to transform your role with a new strategic approach.

Paycor builds HR software for leaders. Our Human Capital Management (HCM) platform modernizes every aspect of people management, from the way you recruit, onboard and develop people, to the way you pay and retain them. But what really sets us apart is our focus on business leaders. For 30 years, we’ve been listening to and partnering with leaders, so we know what you need: HR technology that saves time, powerful analytics that provide actionable insights and a personalized support model. That’s why more than 40,000 organizations nationwide trust Paycor to help them solve problems and achieve their goals.
 Previous:
Next:
Stay up to date with the latest HR trends

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Employee satisfaction surveys are a great way to stay in tune with what your employees are thinking. Get real insights on how to engage and motivate your team.

        Article      
Read Time: 10 min
Employee burnout can impact work quality and morale. Discover the warning signs for burnout and how to prevent it in your workplace.

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Being an effective leader requires more than just technical knowledge. Create an environment where everyone can thrive and understand emotions in oneself and others.
HCM Software
HR + Payroll Software
Talent Management
Workforce Management
Employee Experience
Benefits Administration
Quick Links
Services + Support
855-565-3285
Talk to Sales
855-752-8564
© 2023 Paycor, Inc  |  Refer Paycor  |  Privacy Policy  |  1-800-501-9462 |
*Represents approximately 30,000 corporate clients covering 40,000 businesses employing people