How To Drive Employee Engagement with Total Compensation Statements

Sharing details on the value of your employees’ benefits and PTO helps them understand the full value of what they’re receiving. Unlock the power of total compensation statements.

Employee Experience
Last Updated: December 24, 2019 | Read Time: 5 min
Nearly half of top-performing companies provide total compensation statements to employees (compared to 36% of typical companies).
Communicating the value of the entirety of their compensation is a key to improving employee engagement and retention. Most employees take only salary into consideration when thinking about compensation, but there’s far more in the pot.
A total compensation statement (TCS) is pretty self-explanatory: It’s a document that outlines in detail an employee’s direct and indirect compensation – including all cash income plus the value of all benefits received. The total compensation statement is often referred to as a hidden paycheck or a total rewards statement because most employees focus on their net pay and either forget or underestimate the value of their benefits package.
PayScale’s 2019 Compensation Best Practices Report (CBPR) surveyed 7,030 executives, line of business managers, HR leaders and compensation practitioners at a variety of organizations across sizes and industries, both public and private. Nearly half (43%) of top-performing companies in the current survey provided total compensation statements to their workforce, compared to 36% of typical companies.
A total rewards compensation statement empowers employees by giving them a more in-depth understanding of their compensation, encouraging them to think beyond the dollars and cents of their salaries and helping them understand the total value of their compensation. This empowerment can increase engagement and retention, as well as the quality of new hires.

In addition to listing base salary, a TCS should any of these applicable items:
As with any type of company communication, you have to make your total rewards statements compelling and attention grabbing to help ensure your employees read them. You should:
Communicating total rewards and compensation makes good business sense when it comes to outlining the full extent of your company’s value. By implementing a regular system for gathering and distributing this information, your organization can better demonstrate the investment in its employees.
More than 30,000 medium-sized and small businesses trust Paycor to help them manage their most valuable asset – their people. Paycor is known for delivering modern, intuitive recruiting, benefit, HR and payroll software, but what distinguishes us is our singular focus on helping business leaders, entrepreneurs and HR professionals make a real difference in their organizations. Use our interactive Solution Finder to uncover the Paycor solutions that are right for your organization.
Source: Payscale Survey, 2019
 Previous:
Next:
Stay up to date with the latest HR trends

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Employee satisfaction surveys are a great way to stay in tune with what your employees are thinking. Get real insights on how to engage and motivate your team.

        Article      
Read Time: 10 min
Employee burnout can impact work quality and morale. Discover the warning signs for burnout and how to prevent it in your workplace.

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Being an effective leader requires more than just technical knowledge. Create an environment where everyone can thrive and understand emotions in oneself and others.
HCM Software
HR + Payroll Software
Talent Management
Workforce Management
Employee Experience
Benefits Administration
Quick Links
Services + Support
855-565-3285
Talk to Sales
855-752-8564
© 2023 Paycor, Inc  |  Refer Paycor  |  Privacy Policy  |  1-800-501-9462 |
*Represents approximately 30,000 corporate clients covering 40,000 businesses employing people