Executive Summary: 2020 March HR & Compliance Web Summit

Get the highlights of Paycor's 2 day March 2020 webinar event and access webinar recordings here.

Employee Experience
Last Updated:  March 23, 2020 | Read Time: 15 min
“This was the first webinar to ever make me cry (in a good way).”
“Great session! Good information, relevant and easy to understand and follow.”
“Best HR webinar I’ve ever heard.”
This is just a sample of feedback from attendees at Paycor’s 2020 HR & Compliance Web Summit!
During our 2-day event, industry experts like Josh Bersin offered actionable insights and advice on all things HR, from must-haves for small businesses to succeed to salary history bans and medical marijuana in the workplace.
Did you miss any of the live sessions? Don’t worry, we’ve got you covered. You can watch them on our On-Demand Webinar page.
In the meantime, check out our executive summary for a short overview.
When new parents re-enter the workforce, they can often feel torn between two worlds. In this session, Katy Bunn provided employers with tips and best practices to support moms and dads returning from parental leave.
Before Leave:
It’s important to create documentation so expecting parents know what to do while on leave:
It’s also extremely important to provide tools to prep workers for maternity leave coverage:
If maternity leave coverage is needed, make sure the person filling in starts with enough time to receive proper training:
As an employee nears their due date, here are a few things to consider:
After leave:
Here are a few things employers can do on a returning parent’s first day back:
But most importantly, colleagues should check in with them to see how their transition back to work is going.
A new parent’s first few weeks back can be a challenging time. To help them get back into the swing of things employers should:
Did you know that companies with 50 or more employees are required to have a dedicated pumping space (mother’s room) and allow time for mothers to pump?
To make the mother’s room comfortable, consider adding these amenities:
Want to learn more? Watch the full on-demand session here.
In this session, HR leaders discovered the 5-step process to building bridges with business leaders, impacting the bottom line and getting noticed by the C-suite.
 
Understanding objectives will allow employers to create a strategic HR plan that aligns with the overall corporate strategy.
 
These include:
 
By tracking essential metrics like turnover rates, time-to-fill open positions and cost-per-hire, HR can make recommendations backed by data to help impact the bottom line.
 
These can help HR leaders:
For more tips, watch the full on-demand session here.
How is medical marijuana, recreational marijuana use and CBD oils affecting your current drug-free workplace policies? In this session, Sarah provided an overview of employer responsibilities amidst all the recent changes.
Here are 5 key employer responsibilities:
 
Employers should set expectations:
This is information employees want and need to know.
Employers must communicate drug policies with employees clearly and often. Sarah recommends employers do this by creating a document for employees to acknowledge and sign.
Keep in mind: no state or federal laws allow employees to “get high” at work or come to work impaired.
 
What NOT to do:
Sarah’s #1 takeaway: HR leaders can’t afford to fear this topic. Creating open dialogue with employees is critical to remain compliant and ease employees’ concerns.
Watch the full on-demand session here.
In this keynote session, Josh Bersin—a global industry analyst in the HCM space—shared his unique insights and best practices to help small and medium businesses effectively manage HR and adapt to the needs of the modern workforce.
Here are 5 things every HR leader should do to help the company succeed:
To watch Josh Bersin’s full keynote session, click here.
Are you up-to-date with laws around salary history bans?
To address inequality, several states have enacted bans on asking for previous salary information, although laws vary in terms, scope and applicability. Although, it’s been illegal for decades to pay different wages to men and women for the same work there is still a significant pay gap between genders. The salary history ban was designed to help.
In this session, attendees learned how to get the information they need without asking the questions they can’t.
Here are a few ways employers can determine how much they should pay an employee (and remain compliant):
Want to learn more? Watch the full on demand session here.
Employee data can be a treasure trove for hackers. Just think about it… social security numbers, bank accounts, check stubs and more. This webinar explored recent data breaches and tips to help businesses avoid a similar fate.
What are the most likely causes for data breaches? (2019 data)
Here are 3 basic tips to protect employee data:
For more tips on employee data security, watch the full on-demand webinar here.
Employer branding is an organization’s ticket to getting noticed in a tight labor market. In this session, attendees learned tips to build and enhance their brand to help attract more qualified candidates and retain top performers.
According to SHRM, employer branding is what the organization communicates as its identity to both potential and current employees.
That includes:
How can HR leaders build their employer brand?
First, establish the ideal employee experience:
Then, determine a unique value proposition:
Finally, involve employees:
To learn more about building or enhancing your employer brand, watch the full on-demand session here.
Veterans bring unique skills to the workplace, yet some organizations are reluctant to hire them or unsure how their experience will translate into a civilian role. This session explored the many reasons why veterans make great candidates and offered tips to attract more veterans during the hiring process.
Here are 5 things to keep in mind:
Interested in learning more? Watch the full on-demand session here.
Every week Paycor hosts live HR Center of Excellence webinars. For a list of upcoming sessions click the link below. Keep in mind: our June Web Summit is fast approaching! Stay tuned at Paycor.com for the final dates.
 Previous:
Next:
Stay up to date with the latest HR trends

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Employee satisfaction surveys are a great way to stay in tune with what your employees are thinking. Get real insights on how to engage and motivate your team.

        Article      
Read Time: 10 min
Employee burnout can impact work quality and morale. Discover the warning signs for burnout and how to prevent it in your workplace.

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Being an effective leader requires more than just technical knowledge. Create an environment where everyone can thrive and understand emotions in oneself and others.
HCM Software
HR + Payroll Software
Talent Management
Workforce Management
Employee Experience
Benefits Administration
Quick Links
Services + Support
855-565-3285
Talk to Sales
855-752-8564
© 2023 Paycor, Inc  |  Refer Paycor  |  Privacy Policy  |  1-800-501-9462 |
*Represents approximately 30,000 corporate clients covering 40,000 businesses employing people