How Does Per Diem Work for Employers?

HR professionals need to be aware of regulations that govern per diem pay. Here are all the information that you need to know about per diem.

Workforce Management
Last Updated: March 4, 2022 | Read Time: 6 min
Per diem is Latin, but its meaning couldn’t be simpler. Employees paid per diem receive pay by the day. This is usually the daily stipend given to employees who travel for work. It’s also used when employees on short-term contracts are assigned a daily rate.
Both these scenarios affect payroll, which is why HR professionals need to be aware of regulations that governper diem pay. The good news is, Paycor has collected all the information you need below.
Travelling isn’t cheap. Even when transportation and accommodations are covered, meals, tips and laundry need to be paid for. Accounting in advance for each individual cost is challenging.
Per diems keep things simple. Employees receive a single daily allowance. This gives employees the freedom to prioritize spending on what matters most to them. You won’t be waving goodbye to expense reports, but they won’t need to be quite so detailed.
Per diem pay is usually split into three different categories:
If accommodations have already been paid, an employee will receive a per diem only for ‘Meals & Incidental Expenses’ (M&IE). Meals can also be split into breakfast, lunch and dinner, with different amounts assigned to each. If an employee is driving, the cost of gas should be reimbursed according to IRS mileage reimbursement rates.
Federal law doesn’t, but states often require that businesses cover employees’ travel expenses. Check local regulations before creating a business travel policy. Many businesses set per diem stipends according to national guidelines. Here’s why: anything below these limits is considered non-taxable by the IRS.
For travel within the contiguous US, rates are issued by the General Services administration. Per diems for other US territories are set by the Department of Defense’s Per Diem Committee. Everywhere else in the world is decided by the Department of State.
Business can choose to follow rates specified by location. These can change according to seasonality, with different rates throughout the year. However, to keep things even simpler, there is also a general per diem rate that can be offered when employees travel to most locations in the US.
In 2022, this rate is $155. For just accommodation, the rate is $96. For only meals and incidental expenses, the rate is $59. In certain locations, known as Non-Standard Areas (NSAs), higher per diem rates apply.
Wherever an employee is travelling, businesses aren’t expected to offer a full per diem on the first and last days of a trip—they can reduce 25% from the standard per diem amount.
Remember, per diem isn’t only used when talking about business travel. It also refers to employees who are paid by the day. Oftentimes these employees are hired on a short-term basis and offered shifts when required. This can offer useful flexibility to both businesses and workers.
When it comes to payroll, identifying who is an employee and who is an independent contractor doesn’t come down to whether someone is paid daily, weekly or monthly. All employees, even if they are paid per diem, get a W-2 and have taxes withheld. Employment rules, like overtime pay and the minimum wage for your state, still apply.
Independent contractors can also be paid per diem, but if they complete 1099 forms, they aren’t counted as employees.
Paycor is not a legal, tax, benefit, accounting or investment advisor. All communication from Paycor should be confirmed by your company’s legal, tax, benefit, accounting or investment advisor before making any decisions.
Paycor builds HR solutions for leaders. With Paycor, you can modernize every aspect of people management, from the way you recruit, onboard and develop your team, to the way you pay and retain them.
 Previous:
Next:
Stay up to date with the latest HR trends

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Employee satisfaction surveys are a great way to stay in tune with what your employees are thinking. Get real insights on how to engage and motivate your team.

        Article      
Read Time: 10 min
Employee burnout can impact work quality and morale. Discover the warning signs for burnout and how to prevent it in your workplace.

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Being an effective leader requires more than just technical knowledge. Create an environment where everyone can thrive and understand emotions in oneself and others.
HCM Software
HR + Payroll Software
Talent Management
Workforce Management
Employee Experience
Benefits Administration
Quick Links
Services + Support
855-565-3285
Talk to Sales
855-752-8564
© 2023 Paycor, Inc  |  Refer Paycor  |  Privacy Policy  |  1-800-501-9462 |
*Represents approximately 30,000 corporate clients covering 40,000 businesses employing people