Federal Tax Deposit 101: Everything Employers Must Know

Employers must understand rules around taxes. Read this outline of important aspects of payroll processing and the federal tax deposit.

Workforce Management
Last Updated:  December 11, 2019 | Read Time: 4 min
Most would agree that taxes is not an exciting topic. But a full understanding of the rules around taxes is absolutely essential for employers. It’s a major responsibility to manage employees and follow the requirements of withholding taxes from employee wages.
The IRS has specific and strict guidelines around withheld taxes. Any withheld taxes must be deposited to the IRS in the appropriate manner. This process is called the federal tax deposit.
In this guide, we’ll outline the important aspects of payroll processing and the federal tax deposit.
Before we dig into the federal tax deposit, these are the important areas within employee taxes and payroll.
There is a minimum amount of federal payroll taxes employees must meet. The precise number is set by the Federal Insurance Contributions Act or FICA. The federal tax deposit obligation is comprised of federal income, unemployment, Medicare taxes, and Social Security. The obligation applies to all workers whether seasonal, part-time, or full time.
Employers also have a federal tax deposit obligation. This is the total payroll tax liability which is reported on IRS form 941. This form is due on a quarterly basis.
You may have never heard of the IRS Form 8109, also called the federal tax deposit coupon, but it is important for companies that meet the small business exception. For these companies, they must submit the federal tax deposit coupon along with the federal payroll taxes.
To find your payroll tax liability, the IRS has the 941 Form also called the Quarterly Wage and Tax Return. The form helps companies accurately determine the amount they must pay in a federal tax deposit.
This is how companies electronically submit the federal tax deposit.
As for the deadlines for federal tax deposits, the IRS sets them. The deadlines and due dates are based on company size and employment tax obligations. The IRS uses the gross Social Security and Medicare liability of a company to define the tax deposit schedule.
The IRS notifies companies of their due dates every year by the end of the year so companies have time to prepare. The best strategy is to work with an accountant to stay on top of the details. In general, a common schedule is for the tax deposits to be due monthly by the 15th.
Today, many companies rely on payroll software to help minimize the administrative and manual work of payroll. Today’s HR software has sophisticated features that help employers make sure payroll is executed accurately and according to regulations.
Some payroll systems can actually integrate with your payroll account and make the required deposits automatically, never missing a deadline. Want to learn more about how to make payroll and your federal tax deposit process run seamlessly?
 Previous:
Next:
Stay up to date with the latest HR trends

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Employee satisfaction surveys are a great way to stay in tune with what your employees are thinking. Get real insights on how to engage and motivate your team.

        Article      
Read Time: 10 min
Employee burnout can impact work quality and morale. Discover the warning signs for burnout and how to prevent it in your workplace.

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Being an effective leader requires more than just technical knowledge. Create an environment where everyone can thrive and understand emotions in oneself and others.
HCM Software
HR + Payroll Software
Talent Management
Workforce Management
Employee Experience
Benefits Administration
Quick Links
Services + Support
855-565-3285
Talk to Sales
855-752-8564
© 2023 Paycor, Inc  |  Refer Paycor  |  Privacy Policy  |  1-800-501-9462 |
*Represents approximately 30,000 corporate clients covering 40,000 businesses employing people