10 Onboarding Activities to Improve the Employee Experience. Number 6 Will Surprise You!

Each time your organization hires a new employee it's important to set them up for success. See the 10 onboarding activities to help the facilitate the process.

Employee Experience
Last Updated:  September 17, 2019 | Read Time: 7 min
A solid employee onboarding process sets the tone for all of your new hires, making these employees feel welcome. They shouldn’t have to wait two weeks before getting a laptop or spend the first couple of days filling out a seemingly endless stream of paperwork. If that’s their experience, chances are high that they will likely form a less than favorable opinion of the company and might not be there for the long term.
On the other hand, when your onboarding program is a great experience, your new top talent can jump right into their jobs and start making an immediate impact on the business.
If you think your company has room for improvement, here are ten onboarding activities that you can implement to take your process from “just okay” to “awesome.”
Nothing says, “We’re happy you’re here” to a new employee like having everything they need ready to go prior to their start date. Once the ink is dry on the offer letter, it’s important to keep the lines of communication open. Email your new hire with instructions about where to park their first day on the job. Share a map of the office highlighting important areas such as restrooms, break rooms, the gym and the cafeteria. Send them a copy of your employee handbook. Give them an org chart outlining who does what and highlight the existing employees they’ll be working with the most frequently, as well as their key stakeholders



Remember, onboarding doesn’t stop after the first week. Or the first month. It’s not a “one and done” process. The end of an employee’s first year on the job is when onboarding transitions into retention and employee satisfaction and when job training turns into learning and development. If your onboarding system really isn’t a system at all and you want to improve your onboarding experience, get in touch. Our experts are always happy to help!

 Previous:
Next:
Stay up to date with the latest HR trends

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Employee satisfaction surveys are a great way to stay in tune with what your employees are thinking. Get real insights on how to engage and motivate your team.

        Article      
Read Time: 10 min
Employee burnout can impact work quality and morale. Discover the warning signs for burnout and how to prevent it in your workplace.

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Being an effective leader requires more than just technical knowledge. Create an environment where everyone can thrive and understand emotions in oneself and others.
HCM Software
HR + Payroll Software
Talent Management
Workforce Management
Employee Experience
Benefits Administration
Quick Links
Services + Support
855-565-3285
Talk to Sales
855-752-8564
© 2023 Paycor, Inc  |  Refer Paycor  |  Privacy Policy  |  1-800-501-9462 |
*Represents approximately 30,000 corporate clients covering 40,000 businesses employing people