How Paycor’s Restaurant Scheduling App Can Help Your Business

Restaurant staff management has never been easier than with our restaurant schedule app. View this free demo and learn how Paycor can help your restaurant.

Workforce Management
Last Updated: January 9, 2020 | Read Time: 5 min
Paycor’s restaurant scheduling software makes it easy to ensure you always have your key people where you need then, when you need them. Create efficient schedules faster than ever, inform employees immediately, and empower staff to collaborate and swap shifts to solve scheduling issues.
Effective staff scheduling is vital for any restaurant business to succeed. Managers have enough on their plates, even without keeping track of employee availability and trying to please everyone—waiters, chefs, hostesses and bartenders—with perfect schedules. Paycor Scheduling helps managers save time and money, by creating efficient restaurant employee schedules quicker than ever.
Paycor’s restaurant scheduling app is customizable, allowing you to tailor it to the needs of your business. The intuitive system helps you easily schedule all your staff, across unlimited locations. Save time by applying weekly templates, creating repeating shifts, or allowing the system to automatically select staff for open shifts based on rank, experience, or availability. Click publish, and instantly notify staff.
View by day, week or month, and sort the restaurant schedule based on employees, departments or job positions. You can also easily view employee availability and in case you accidentally schedule them twice, you receive a notification.
When an employee is unavailable for a shift, they can use the Paycor Scheduling app to drop that shift, seek cover, or search for a shift swap. Other team members can pick up the shift, offer cover, or accept the trade. All managers have to do is approve, saving time and ensuring your restaurant is never left short-staffed.
In such a fast paced environment, effective communication is crucial. Through our restaurant scheduling app, you can share files and documents as well as send messages to all staff members, or even create groups for specialized personnel. This allows you to share information in real time with every team member. Your staff will have quick access to any information they, reducing misunderstandings and conflicts. As Paycor’s restaurant schedule app is customizable, you can always choose which employees have access to which information.
Paycor’s easy-to-use smartphone apps make life easier for everyone. Managers can create schedules, view availability, and respond to requests, from wherever they are. Your staff can receive notifications related to changes in the restaurant schedule or reminders of when their shifts begin through SMS and push notifications.
Paycor helps businesses and organizations of all sizes to be more productive.
 Previous:
Next:
Stay up to date with the latest HR trends

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Employee satisfaction surveys are a great way to stay in tune with what your employees are thinking. Get real insights on how to engage and motivate your team.

        Article      
Read Time: 10 min
Employee burnout can impact work quality and morale. Discover the warning signs for burnout and how to prevent it in your workplace.

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Being an effective leader requires more than just technical knowledge. Create an environment where everyone can thrive and understand emotions in oneself and others.
HCM Software
HR + Payroll Software
Talent Management
Workforce Management
Employee Experience
Benefits Administration
Quick Links
Services + Support
855-565-3285
Talk to Sales
855-752-8564
© 2023 Paycor, Inc  |  Refer Paycor  |  Privacy Policy  |  1-800-501-9462 |
*Represents approximately 30,000 corporate clients covering 40,000 businesses employing people