How to Ensure Your Compensation Plan Is on Target

Compensation packages impact morale, recruiting and compliance. See the 5 benefits of having a compensation management program in place.

Workforce Management
Last Updated: January 26, 2022 | Read Time: 8 min
Having a healthy, competitive employee compensation program can improve existing employee engagement and make attracting top talent a breeze, something that can be a real game-changer with today’s current employment landscape. Compensation in HR management provides data that is in line with your competition to give your hiring managers important information they’ll need when making a job offer to a candidate (this applies to raises and bonuses as well). Additionally, it can help your company remain compliant with Fair Labor Standards Act (FLSA) regulations when you can easily show that unbiased compensation is paid across the board.
So, how is your compensation management program looking? If you’re a business owner and your answer is, “I don’t really know” or “We don’t have one,” keep reading.
Compensation management is how companies ensure that their salaries and bonuses are equitable, competitive and in-line with market data. The process also includes managing your employee benefits to make sure that your indirect compensation is meeting the needs of your employees. Effective compensation management makes up a big part of human resources because it can have an impact, whether negative or positive, on hiring, employee retention and engagement, and overall company performance and brand.
When most people hear the word “compensation,” their minds almost immediately equate it with “employee salary.” While it’s true that salaries play a large part in the process of compensation, compensation methods can include a whole lot more. The process of compensation includes direct compensation (financial) plus indirect compensation (financial + non-financial). Direct compensation is made up of:
Indirect compensation is made up of items such as:
We listed “It helps ensure pay equity” as #1 for a reason. If you don’t have a handle on your compensation and salary bands across the entire company, you could very easily get into some hot water with the government. And ignorance is no excuse. If the IRS discovers that you’re paying some folks more than others and there’s a distinct pattern (such as paying men more than women who do the same work), the company could find itself subject to penalties, fines and even lawsuits. Compensation management software can help your company stay on the right side of federal regulations!
Communicating total rewards and compensation to your employees makes good business sense when it comes to outlining the full extent of your company’s value. By implementing a regular system for gathering and distributing this information, your organization can better demonstrate the investment in its employees. If your compensation program isn’t as great as it could be, get in touch. Compensation management systems can help!
To get out of the weeds once and for all, you need everything related to comp in one system. Automate planning, mitigate risk and spend more time developing compensation strategy with Paycor’s compensation planning solution.
When your employees are appropriately compensated, it’s a win-win situation for them and your company. When employees believe they’re being paid fairly they feel more valued and recognized. On the other hand, if they believe they’re undercompensated, they’ll feel underappreciated and likely start the hunt for an opportunity that offers them better compensation.
To streamline your compensation process, you should look for a platform that provides a single source of truth to manage compensation, not spreadsheets or duplicate data entry in multiple systems. Automated workflows and guided support tools can help you make more informed decisions and help ensure that salaries, bonuses and employee rewards are equitable and competitive.
To attract top candidates and retain and engage existing employees through competitive compensation that aligns with your company’s budget, your local job market, and government regulations.
When it comes to trusted HR expertise, turn to Paycor for help. Paycor’s HR Support Center is a comprehensive HR resource that provides organizations access to employee handbook templates, sample job descriptions, useful checklists, law alerts and more. Plus, dedicated support from an HR expert is always available with HR Support Center On-Demand.
 Previous:
Next:
Stay up to date with the latest HR trends

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Employee satisfaction surveys are a great way to stay in tune with what your employees are thinking. Get real insights on how to engage and motivate your team.

        Article      
Read Time: 10 min
Employee burnout can impact work quality and morale. Discover the warning signs for burnout and how to prevent it in your workplace.

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Being an effective leader requires more than just technical knowledge. Create an environment where everyone can thrive and understand emotions in oneself and others.
HCM Software
HR + Payroll Software
Talent Management
Workforce Management
Employee Experience
Benefits Administration
Quick Links
Services + Support
855-565-3285
Talk to Sales
855-752-8564
© 2023 Paycor, Inc  |  Refer Paycor  |  Privacy Policy  |  1-800-501-9462 |
*Represents approximately 30,000 corporate clients covering 40,000 businesses employing people