What You Should Know about Imputed Income and Fringe Benefits

Confused by the nuances of imputed income and fringe benefits? You're not alone. Get the definitions and facts here.

Workforce Management
Last Updated:  December 2, 2020 | Read Time: 4 min
Compensation and benefits come in different varieties, but the IRS cares about it all (or most of it, at least). Do you drive a company car? Did you receive a gift card from your employer for stellar performance? Guess what—taxes need to be paid on the value of those items.
It’s easy to overlook fringe benefits as taxable income and most employees will have no idea what “imputed income” even means. If you’re filing tax returns, though, you need to make sure you know exactly what counts and what to do about it.
When an employee receives non-cash compensation that’s considered taxable, the value of that benefit becomes imputed income for the employee. Unless specifically exempt, imputed income is added to the employee’s gross (taxable) income. It isn’t included in the net pay because the employee has already received the benefit in some other form. But it is treated as income so employers need to include it in the employee’s form W-2 for tax purposes.
Imputed income is subject to Social Security and Medicare tax but typically not federal income tax. An employee can elect to withhold federal income tax from the imputed pay, or they can simply pay the amount due when filing their return.
Some examples of imputed income include:
Imputed income may also be used to determine an amount for child support payments. Depending on the state, imputed income consideration is meant to give the judge a more precise view of a noncustodial parent’s total income, helping to determine a more accurate child support amount.
A fringe benefit is services, goods or experiences given to employees in addition to their regular wages, and they are taxable. For example, an employee who wins a $100 gift card for completing a fitness challenge at work has to report it as income.
Some examples of fringe benefits include:
Employers can indulge in a few fringe benefits that won’t raise any red flags with the IRS. Called “de minimis (minimal) benefits,” these benefits are something worth so little that the IRS considers it administratively impractical to record or keep an account.
While there’s no official dollar amount defining what makes a benefit de minimis, it’s best to keep it less than $75 because the IRS says anything $100 or more is not considered a de minimis benefit.
Some de minimis benefits include:
It can be confusing to keep track of what’s taxable income and what’s not. You can always review the IRS’ Fringe Benefit Guide for the latest information on imputed income. And remember, Paycor is here to help your organization with any payroll processing needs you may require.

 Previous:
Next:
Stay up to date with the latest HR trends

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Employee satisfaction surveys are a great way to stay in tune with what your employees are thinking. Get real insights on how to engage and motivate your team.

        Article      
Read Time: 10 min
Employee burnout can impact work quality and morale. Discover the warning signs for burnout and how to prevent it in your workplace.

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Being an effective leader requires more than just technical knowledge. Create an environment where everyone can thrive and understand emotions in oneself and others.
HCM Software
HR + Payroll Software
Talent Management
Workforce Management
Employee Experience
Benefits Administration
Quick Links
Services + Support
855-565-3285
Talk to Sales
855-752-8564
© 2023 Paycor, Inc  |  Refer Paycor  |  Privacy Policy  |  1-800-501-9462 |
*Represents approximately 30,000 corporate clients covering 40,000 businesses employing people