Hiring Independent Contractors: Are They Right for Your Business?

It's becoming more common for businesses to  hire independent contractors. See the pros and cons of hiring freelance help, here.

Workforce Management
Last Updated:  September 19, 2019 | Read Time: 5 min
In today’s booming gig economy, it’s becoming more common for businesses to hire freelancers or contract workers instead of employees to supplement their existing workforce. Independent contractors can be brought on to fill just about any role within a company, from janitorial services to members of the C-suite.
Here’s the unique distinction: Independent contractors are self-employed and not considered a full-time employee of your company.
While this makes hiring freelancers attractive – knowing that the business is not responsible for additional overhead and equipment, payroll taxes, or benefits – you’ll also find some challenges and potential pitfalls that should be faced when you work with independent contractors. Here, we’ll go over a few of the pros and cons of making the decision to hire freelancers.
Need help classifying employees? Check out this interactive worksheet.
If you’re planning to hire an independent contractor, it’s important to take all the pros and cons into consideration. If you’re not sure about how to pay them or the potential compliance challenges surrounding hiring them, let’s talk. We’re an HCM software company with decades of experience helping businesses classify employees and freelancers in every industry.

 Previous:
Next:
Stay up to date with the latest HR trends

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Employee satisfaction surveys are a great way to stay in tune with what your employees are thinking. Get real insights on how to engage and motivate your team.

        Article      
Read Time: 10 min
Employee burnout can impact work quality and morale. Discover the warning signs for burnout and how to prevent it in your workplace.

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Being an effective leader requires more than just technical knowledge. Create an environment where everyone can thrive and understand emotions in oneself and others.
HCM Software
HR + Payroll Software
Talent Management
Workforce Management
Employee Experience
Benefits Administration
Quick Links
Services + Support
855-565-3285
Talk to Sales
855-752-8564
© 2023 Paycor, Inc  |  Refer Paycor  |  Privacy Policy  |  1-800-501-9462 |
*Represents approximately 30,000 corporate clients covering 40,000 businesses employing people