Communicating Benefits to a Multigenerational Workforce

Not all generations respond to the same form of communications. Start here when determining how to communicate benefits packages to your workforce.

Benefits Administration
Last Updated: February 18, 2021 | Read Time: 4 min
Your clients spend $11.60/hr. (on average) per employee on benefits, which represents a huge investment for small and mid-sized businesses (Bureau of Labor Statistics). But as you know, there’s also an investment of time; think of the many hours you spend guiding your clients through the process of crafting a benefits strategy that addresses the needs of the 5 generations in the workforce.
But here’s the problem: if a tree falls in the woods, does anyone hear it?
If open enrollment is confusing for your clients, imagine how their employees feel. Without the right education, employees stick with the benefits they know, and they may never know that there was a better option for them.
According to Aflac, 46% of Americans take less than 30 minutes to make benefits decisions, and in that brief time, 89% of people choose the same plans as the year before.
You and your clients put a lot of effort into developing new programs for employees. Don’t skip a crucial final step—make sure they know what they’re getting. And make sure you’re sending the right message to the right people.
*Keep in mind these communication preferences are just rules of thumb. Your clients’ workforce is diverse and dynamic and no one channel is enough for effective communication.
Many employers try to communicate their benefit offerings through hard-to-read one-pagers and dull email blasts. This does nothing but confuse employees and drive them to the benefits they always choose. If your clients want real ROI on their benefit plans they’ll need to engage their employees through easy-to-understand, insightful education programs. That’s where a Learning Management System can help.
Similar to how Word allows you to write documents and Gmail helps you manage emails, an LMS is software that helps your clients create, manage and deliver eLearning courses.
For an inside look at how your clients can utilize our LMS, check out this short video.



Online Course Builder
Build eLearning courses that introduce benefits and breakdown the pros of each offering. Admins can organize courses by groups, teams, departments or individuals.
Customized Learning Paths
Each generation absorbs information differently and holds some benefit offerings in higher regards than others. For instance, Baby Boomers and Gen Xers may want to dive deeper into professional development programs and retirement planning services. With customized learning paths, employees can zero in on the benefits that mean the most to them. Do your clients have a new benefit they want everyone to learn about during open enrollment? Create a mandatory eLearning session and track which employees complete the course.
Messages and Notifications
Your clients can take advantage of real-time notifications. Drive higher course completion rates through unique communication and notifications.
Reports and Dashboards
Gain insights into education impact with reports and dashboards. Your clients can easily share their insights with employees and show them which benefits matter most.
Gamification and Leaderboards
Engage and motivate users with achievements, points and badges based on their activity in the education programs. Test their knowledge and ensure they understand their benefit offerings. Gamification is a great way to engage Gen Xers, Millennials and Gen Z.
Surveys and Feedback
Think employees love their benefits? Gather feedback in your LMS using built-in survey tools and out-of-the-box repots.
Learning Management Systems work for all generations. By offering courses through video, podcasts, PowerPoint presentations and more, your clients can ensure their employees understand benefit offerings and achieve ROI that impacts their bottom line.
For nearly 30 years, Paycor has given clients like yours the right technology, the best support and valuable thought leadership to help them achieve their goals and make a real difference in their organization.

 Previous:
Next:
Stay up to date with the latest HR trends

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Employee satisfaction surveys are a great way to stay in tune with what your employees are thinking. Get real insights on how to engage and motivate your team.

        Article      
Read Time: 10 min
Employee burnout can impact work quality and morale. Discover the warning signs for burnout and how to prevent it in your workplace.

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Being an effective leader requires more than just technical knowledge. Create an environment where everyone can thrive and understand emotions in oneself and others.
HCM Software
HR + Payroll Software
Talent Management
Workforce Management
Employee Experience
Benefits Administration
Quick Links
Services + Support
855-565-3285
Talk to Sales
855-752-8564
© 2023 Paycor, Inc  |  Refer Paycor  |  Privacy Policy  |  1-800-501-9462 |
*Represents approximately 30,000 corporate clients covering 40,000 businesses employing people