Hiring Manager Intake Form

Download the free Hiring Manager Intake Form to create better communication between recruiters and hiring managers.

This form helps recruiters understand expectations during the screening process. 
Download Your 
                                   Free Copy 

DOWNLOADS:  574 And Counting...!
Ensure Everyone Is on the Same Page
The hiring manager intake form is a questionnaire that provides you with a simple and structured methodology for keeping your hiring managers actively involved in the recruiting process. Think of it as checklist prior to takeoff that will accomplish two goals:
Proactive Recruiting Is Easier Than Reactive Recruiting
Many companies fall into reactive recruiting practices. Recruiters pass through candidates based on the limited information that hiring managers have provided them. On the flip side, hiring managers assess each of these candidates against the next one, developing an ever-changing candidate criteria as they go. Unfortunately, this process is completely backward and opens the door for bad hires, which will only end up wasting valuable time and money. You need to define the ideal candidate profile early on and lock down a hiring strategy so that you aren’t chasing a moving target.
The secret of every great salesman is a deep understanding of their product. In recruiting, your product is the job that you are hiring for. If you are knowledgeable about the position, this is evident in the conversations that you have with candidates and will allow you to tell a far more compelling story.
Furthermore, effectively communicating a role to candidates and answering any questions that they may have removes the doubt and perceived risk in their mind. By removing your candidate’s uncertainty, you are simultaneously removing your own uncertainty about whether or not they will accept a job offer. Everything has already been laid out on the table and you can get a fair read on how your candidate is feeling. After all, you don’t want to be left at the altar because of some last-minute doubts.
The goal is always to hire the best but how can you hire the best if you haven’t defined what a quality candidate is? Using the hiring manager intake form gives you a definitive candidate criterion so that you can be laser-focused in your search for that next great hire.
Having a comprehensive understanding of a given role means that you can present it to candidates accurately and with full transparency. You will be selling the actual role that the candidate will be filling, not performing some bait and switch after they sign on to do the job. This will increase retention rates because your new hires are self-selecting into the job. They aren’t being sold on a job that they won’t actually be doing.
Fill out the form online or simply print it and share with your hiring team.
NEXT:
NEXT: