The 25 Best HR & Recruiting Blogs

The top 25 HR and Recruiting blogs of 2018 include veterans like Tim Sackett, Evil HR Lady and HR Capitalist, as well as authorities like LinkedIn and Indeed. Read the full list here.

Talent Management
Last Updated:  October 4, 2019 | Read Time: 12 min
The good news is, there’s so much great HR & recruiting advice out there. The bad news is, it can be as overwhelming as the Netflix homepage. To help you know where to start, here are our top 25 blogs.
About: Tim is a well known veteran in the HR & recruiting industry. Bringing over 20 years of experience to the table, he offers insight into every area of the HR & recruiting landscape in his popular blog “The Project”. His blog features a fun, conversational tone of voice that makes you feel like you are learning from a knowledgeable friend with years of experience and expertise in recruiting.
Post Frequency: Daily
Our Favorite Recent Post: Amazon just got 200,000+ applications and that is a giant problem!
About: Founded by Kris Dunn in late 2007, Fistful of Talent offers a large selection of HR, recruiting and talent blog posts that dive into areas that other recruiting blogs do not. With a qualified and diverse team of writers including Tim Sackett, you are sure to always find something here that piques your interest.
Post Frequency: Daily
Our Favorite Recent Post: Lessons on Leadership from My Bad Boss(es)
About: As the largest online recruiting publication, Recruiter.com continues to leave its mark on the recruitment blogging space. With a good mix of both original and guest content, content here is posted a few times a day, so you can be sure you’ll be seeing a wide array of content. Topics here are geared towards a few different audiences as well – recruiters, HR professionals, and even job seekers.
Post Frequency: Multiple times daily
Our Favorite Recent Post: 4 Quick Fixes to Improve Your Quality of Hire
About: What better place to go for your daily dose of HR and recruiting content than the largest professional social network in the world? With rotating blog topics ranging from hiring millennials to latest trends in the recruiting space, there is always something practical you can take away from the LinkedIn Talent Blog. Plus, every week, LinkedIn features the Top 10 Must Read Articles for Recruiters this Week, so you can be sure you’re not missing the best news in recruiting.
Post Frequency: Daily
Our Favorite Recent Post: 10 Ways to Avoid Making $100,000+ Hiring Mistakes
About: Recruiting Daily is one of the premier sites for everything recruiting. Blog content is split into four general topic areas (recruitment marketing, sourcing, tech and trends), and Recruiting Daily also runs podcasts where they interview leaders in recruiting and HR as well as dive into recruiting best practices.
Post Frequency: Daily
Our Favorite Recent Post: What’s Going On: The Current Reality of Recruitment Marketing
About: Sharlyn Lauby started HR Bartender wanting to be “that friendly face who’s there when you need them.” She has achieved just that, being consistently recognized for the content she provides as well as being named one of the top 5 HR blogs by SHRM. With topics ranging from HR Law/legislation to technology and social media, HR Bartender discusses many different facets of the HR landscape.
Post Frequency: Every other day
Our Favorite Recent Post: The New Employee – Employer Social Contract
About: TechnologyAdvice is a website and service that helps professionals in a wide variety of industries find and evaluate software for specific business needs. In terms of blog content, TechnologyAdvice is the site that has a little bit of everything.. With topics including IT, sales, marketing, healthcare and HR, Technology Advice helps professionals from various fields stay up to date with content on many topics, with a heavy slant towards technology.
Post Frequency: Daily
Our Favorite Recent Post: Generation Z in the Workplace: How to Recruit Young Talent, Explained
About: Headed up by Jessica Miller-Merrell, Workology is a group of more than 100 published writers who contribute regularly to the community. The blog has something for employees at any level of an organization and content is split by levels of experience. As a Forbes Top 50 Social Media Influencer, Jessica Miller-Merrell is well connected in the industry, which speaks to the wide variety of content and authors who write for Workology.
Post Frequency: Bi-weekly
Our Favorite Recent Post: How Feedback Can Improve Your Recruitment Strategy
About: When it comes to HR/recruiting blogs the first words that come to people’s minds usually aren’t “exciting” or “entertaining”. The HR Capitalist breaks this trend with their fun and thought provoking content. Headed up by Kris Dunn, (who is also on our list for his site, Fistful of Talent) The HR Capitalist dives beneath the surface of “best practices” and uses real world examples to get their point across.
Post Frequency: Daily
Our Favorite Recent Post: The 5 Ways You Intimidate People Without Directly Threatening Them…
About: Greg Savage has been in the recruitment industry for over four decades, having founded four highly successful businesses and being a trusted advisor for many global recruitment companies. His blog takes from his vast knowledge of and experience in recruiting and puts that expertise into writing. Greg also has a video series on his blog called “Sixty Savage Seconds” where he shares inspiration, ideas, tactics and thought starters all in under one minute. If you’ve got some spare time (and who doesn’t have one minute?) definitely check out The Savage Truth.
Post Frequency: Weekly
Our Favorite Recent Post: Is The Recruitment Market Slowing? The Answer Is Here…
About: With over 200,000 readers per month, ERE is one of the go to sources for thought leadership, recruiting technology news and more. Almost all of the articles on ERE are written exclusively for ERE readers by thought leaders on the subject matter sharing their own personal experiences and opinions. If you are looking to take your recruiting to the next level be sure to check out ERE.
Post Frequency: Daily
Our Favorite Recent Post:  Proceed With Caution When Assessing Someone With Social Media
About: An offshoot of ERE, TLNT provides the same top tier content but for HR and talent management leaders instead of recruiters. Not only do they have their regularly updated blog and daily e-newsletter, TLNT also has its own job board, webinars and live events specifically for people in the talent management space.
Post Frequency: Daily
Our Favorite Recent Post:  Don’t Make These Mistakes When You Hire Someone
About: HR Dive has a unique approach to delivering HR/recruiting content. All of their articles are made to be read in 60 seconds. This is great, because if there is one thing that most of us in the HR space don’t have a lot of, it’s time. If you find yourself with an extra five minutes before that next interview, head over to HR Drive and catch up on the latest in recruiting and HR.
Post Frequency: Multiple times daily
Our Favorite Recent Post: Expanding PTO is a Competitive Recruiting Strategy, New Survey Says
About: Social Talent focuses on training recruiters and hiring professionals to work smarter and more efficiently. Their blog definitely follows suit, providing focused and relevant content for anybody looking to improve their companies recruitment efforts.
Post Frequency: Daily
Our Favorite Recent Post: How Agile Can Work For You: Scrum & Kanban
About: HRE has long been a go-to source for news and best practices in the HR sector. Authors of the print magazine of the same title, Human Resource Executive currently circulates to 75,000 HR professionals and is published 12 times a year. The HRE Daily section on the online blog is one of the best places to get HR related news. Tackling more high level topics such as employment law and benefits/compensation, Human Resource Executive is written primarily for Vice Presidents and Directors of Human Resources.
Post Frequency: Daily
Our Favorite Recent Post: Could The Economy Be Boosting Employee Loyalty?
About: Offering podcasts, webinars, ebooks and a great blog, TalentCulture is a great full stack recruitment site. Their #WorkTrends blog series publishes a new article every week covering the latest hot topic in the recruiting/HR. If you want to stay on top of what’s going on while also staying entertained, TalentCulture is a great place to look.
Post Frequency: Three times weekly
Our Favorite Recent Post: 4 Ways to Increase Gender Equality in the Workplace
About: TinyPulse is a company that provides you with the employee engagement and happiness data you need from your team to build and maintain a strong company culture that attracts quality candidates. Many companies don’t know how their employees really feel about company culture, benefits and leadership. Their blog also aims to solve this problem, providing best practices around employee turnover, onboarding, employee engagement and company culture. If you care about your company culture (and you should!), definitely check out the TINYpulse blog.
Post Frequency: Twice weekly
Our Favorite Recent Post: 10 Fun and Unique Employee Recognition Awards
About: The Undercover Recruiter has long been a top pick for people in all aspects of the recruitment landscape. Featuring articles covering topics for employers, recruiters and candidates alike, anyone will find value in adding this blog to their recruiting reading list.
Post Frequency: Daily
Our Favorite Recent Post: Working Hours: Which Nations Work The Longest”
About: Recruiting Blogs is a great all-around resource for anybody in the HR and recruiting space. Not only do they offer a blog with articles covering a plethora of topics, Recruiting Blogs also has podcasts, webinars, recruiting tools and a handy list of all of the upcoming HR/recruiting conferences. If you are serious about recruiting and getting your processes up to snuff, be sure add Recruiting Blogs to your reading list.
Post Frequency: Multiple times daily
Our Favorite Recent Post:  Age and Workplace Satisfaction
About: HR has long been seen as the business unit technology forgot. Luckily, this is not the case anymore – partly because of sites like HR Technologist. Their mission is to help HR professionals “navigate the HR tech ecosystem, make the right tech investment choices, make investments that deliver ROI and embrace new skills as required by HR professionals in the digital age” by providing top notch articles, interviews and HR tech news.
Post Frequency: Multiple times daily
Our Favorite Recent Post:  The Role of HR in Office Safety and Well-Being
About: HR Daily Advisor is a great resource to make sure you stay up to date on everything that is going on in the HR space. HR Daily Advisor has articles published daily as well as videos, podcasts, infographics, best practice white papers and more. One thing that sets HR Daily Advisor apart is their great “Free Resources” section where you can download white papers and PDF guides on countless HR topics.
Post Frequency: Multiple times daily
Our Favorite Recent Post:  Employees Are Growing Up-Your Benefits Need To, Too
About: It’s no surprise that one of the leaders in the job search market would also have a great recruitment blog. One thing that makes the indeed blog stand out is the many different channels through which they deliver their content. Besides their normal blog content, indeed also provides videos as well as reports on different trends in the recruitment sector. With many categories ranging from small business hiring to employer branding, if upping your candidate search game is on your to-do list check out the indeed blog.
Post Frequency: Daily
Our Favorite Recent Post: 5 Things Every Job Description Needs In 2019

 Previous:
Next:
Stay up to date with the latest HR trends

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Employee satisfaction surveys are a great way to stay in tune with what your employees are thinking. Get real insights on how to engage and motivate your team.

        Article      
Read Time: 10 min
Employee burnout can impact work quality and morale. Discover the warning signs for burnout and how to prevent it in your workplace.

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Being an effective leader requires more than just technical knowledge. Create an environment where everyone can thrive and understand emotions in oneself and others.
HCM Software
HR + Payroll Software
Talent Management
Workforce Management
Employee Experience
Benefits Administration
Quick Links
Services + Support
855-565-3285
Talk to Sales
855-752-8564
© 2023 Paycor, Inc  |  Refer Paycor  |  Privacy Policy  |  1-800-501-9462 |
*Represents approximately 30,000 corporate clients covering 40,000 businesses employing people