Union Payroll Processing: 3 Things to Know

Businesses processing payroll for union employees must know the regulations. Here are the 3 things to be mindful of when paying union employees.

Employee Experience
Last Updated:  December 24, 2020 | Read Time: 4 min
Labor unions have frequently been in the news over the past few years, as the administration and its appointees sought to limit union power. Rulings on collective bargaining and union regulations can have a big impact on the day-to-day running of businesses. HR departments need to keep a close eye on these laws, as the inclusion of union members can require substantial changes to how you onboard, train and pay employees.
Unions require heavy time tracking to ensure employees are not working more hours than permitted or working hours that don’t align with their schedules. But payroll processing for union employees does not have to be a major burden: having the right tools in place – such as time and attendance tracking or mobile punching functionality to help ensure that employees don’t clock in from outside of the building or geographic area designated by the employer – can make the process relatively simple.
Here are three important things to keep in mind when thinking about payroll processing for union workers:
The main difference between payroll processing for union and non-union employees is the union deduction. A predetermined portion of each paycheck is to be set aside for union dues. If your company employs both union and non-union workers, keeping track of deductions can be tricky. Further complicating matters, there are four types of union “shops” that can be found in a workplace:
Paycor’s payroll software automates this process so that the proper union deductions are always taken out on time and in full.
A number of factors go into determining the pay rate for union employees. These may include seniority, department and job performance.
Most unions have specific requirements regarding pay scales and payroll processing, so it is important to take a detailed look at all of the rules and regulations put in place by each particular union. Because of this complexity, most unions prefer that companies use automated payroll processing software, as having a system makes it easier to implement specific payroll requirements.

While ensuring accurate tracking of hours worked and vacation time taken are always necessary tasks for HR departments, it is even more important for companies where union labor plays a significant role. Given the specific requirements surrounding the length of the workday and the workweek, a business that fails to accurately track hours worked could be putting itself at risk. Paycor’s time solution can track this data and use it to create quick and accurate reports. This makes it easy for business leaders to provide the necessary documentation during discussions with union leaders.
We offer the best HCM platform and the best proactive service, expertise and thought leadership for medium and small businesses. Our team of recruiting, HR, tax, payroll and compliance experts are dedicated to customer satisfaction and success. From proactive service to industry-leading thought leadership, we provide you with the tools you need to make a difference. Need help processing payroll complexities within your organization? Reach out to our team to learn how we can support your business.
 Previous:
Next:
Stay up to date with the latest HR trends

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Employee satisfaction surveys are a great way to stay in tune with what your employees are thinking. Get real insights on how to engage and motivate your team.

        Article      
Read Time: 10 min
Employee burnout can impact work quality and morale. Discover the warning signs for burnout and how to prevent it in your workplace.

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Being an effective leader requires more than just technical knowledge. Create an environment where everyone can thrive and understand emotions in oneself and others.
HCM Software
HR + Payroll Software
Talent Management
Workforce Management
Employee Experience
Benefits Administration
Quick Links
Services + Support
855-565-3285
Talk to Sales
855-752-8564
© 2023 Paycor, Inc  |  Refer Paycor  |  Privacy Policy  |  1-800-501-9462 |
*Represents approximately 30,000 corporate clients covering 40,000 businesses employing people