5 Tips for Becoming Employee of the Year

employee development, high-potential employees, how to stand out, impress your manager

Employee Experience
Last Updated:  September 10, 2015 | Read Time: 4 min
Are you looking to make an impact at your company but struggling to
stand out among your colleagues? Here are five tips to give you a leg up
in the competitive job industry so you can make a name for yourself and
be in line for the next promotion or company recognition.
Your boss’ primary focus is likely to develop strategic initiatives to
ensure the organization’s long-term future. In addition, their to-do
list is overwhelming and little details can be lost along the way. How
can you make a difference for your boss and the organization? Don’t wait
to be asked to complete a task or project. Take the initiative and
formulate a strategy or ask how you can lessen your boss’ workload. Your
contribution will not go unnoticed.
Your attitude and demeanor can make a difference when being evaluated by
your manager. Are you enthusiastic and willing to contribute wherever
possible, or do you sulk when things don’t go your way and appear
disinterested? No one wants to be around someone who is irritable and
unapproachable. Exhibit a positive attitude and good things will come
your way. Plus, your attitude will have a positive effect on your work
environment.
Always increase your value in the workplace by enhancing and improving
your skills while looking to develop new ones. If you are asked to
attend a meeting that does not directly impact your role, accept and
make the most out of the opportunity. You could develop valuable insight
into another area of the company and decide this may be a better fit for
you in the long run. The more you can learn about your organization as a
whole, the more marketable you will be in the future.
The more reliable and responsible you are, the more you will be trusted
by your manager. Do you execute and complete tasks effectively and in a
timely manner, or is your manager constantly correcting your work and
reminding you to do things? Gaining your manager’s trust will offer more
opportunities for you to work on a variety of projects because you have
demonstrated the ability to perform at a high level. Being identified as
the go-to person for your boss can go a long way in your development.
You were hired to do a job so it is up to you to know it inside and out.
Take training seriously and pick the brains of your peers to better
understand the position. The more you go above and beyond what is
required of you, the more you will be noticed. When issues arise, take
responsibility for the problem and determine a course of action to
correct it. During times of adversity, people are often quick to point
the finger at others. Break the mold and take responsibility. It is up
to you to make the most out of your opportunities and challenges—how
will you respond?
Sources: Forbes and The Real Truth
Related resources:
Webinar: Creating a Successful Development Plan for High Potential Employees
Article: A 3-Step Plan for Nurturing High-Potential Employees
Article: Book Study Feature: The Alliance: Managing Talent in the Networked Age
 Previous:
Next:
Stay up to date with the latest HR trends

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Employee satisfaction surveys are a great way to stay in tune with what your employees are thinking. Get real insights on how to engage and motivate your team.

        Article      
Read Time: 10 min
Employee burnout can impact work quality and morale. Discover the warning signs for burnout and how to prevent it in your workplace.

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Being an effective leader requires more than just technical knowledge. Create an environment where everyone can thrive and understand emotions in oneself and others.
HCM Software
HR + Payroll Software
Talent Management
Workforce Management
Employee Experience
Benefits Administration
Quick Links
Services + Support
855-565-3285
Talk to Sales
855-752-8564
© 2023 Paycor, Inc  |  Refer Paycor  |  Privacy Policy  |  1-800-501-9462 |
*Represents approximately 30,000 corporate clients covering 40,000 businesses employing people