10 Ways to Promote Diversity, Equity & Inclusion in the Workplace

A diverse, equitable, and inclusive workforce is vital to the success of any organization. Read 10 ways you can promote this in your workplace.  

Employee Experience
Last Updated: October 7, 2021 | Read Time: 6 min
Companies seeking to improve employee recruitment, performance, and retention, increase engagement, achieve higher revenue and growth can find opportunities and resources through diversity, equity, and inclusion initiatives.
It’s normal, anymore, for employees to spend more time at work than they do anywhere else. Imagine if everyone in your organization, regardless of gender identity, ethnicity, race, sexual orientation, age, disability, economic situation, religion, culture, etc., felt safe, welcomed, and accepted wholeheartedly for who they are and what they can contribute? What if your employees knew that your company and their co-workers cared about them as if they were a “second family?” Imagine what your company could accomplish and how appealing it would be to work for and do business with such an organization.
A diverse, equitable, and inclusive workforce is vital to the success of any organization. It has become the new standard of leadership. Positive day-to-day experiences bring management closer to employees. Encouraging employees to share perspectives and insights where they feel safe and supported creates opportunities for relationship-building and innovation. It also brings companies closer to the customers and communities they serve and support.
With a bit of effort and some strategic planning, your company can create a culture that promotes diversity, equity, and inclusion in the workplace. Here are 10 tips for consideration:
Research shows that diversity, equity, and inclusion programs result in greater employee satisfaction and better performance and outcomes.
Diversity, equity, and inclusion are more than the latest buzzwords. The business-related leadership styles, management efforts, initiatives and programs related to these words should have been happening all along.
For more free resources and tools that promote DE&I best practices in the workplace, visit Perspectives+. It’s Paycor’s online knowledge library designed to help our partner network drive change, empower colleagues, and foster new leaders.
 Previous:
Next:
Stay up to date with the latest HR trends

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Employee satisfaction surveys are a great way to stay in tune with what your employees are thinking. Get real insights on how to engage and motivate your team.

        Article      
Read Time: 10 min
Employee burnout can impact work quality and morale. Discover the warning signs for burnout and how to prevent it in your workplace.

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Being an effective leader requires more than just technical knowledge. Create an environment where everyone can thrive and understand emotions in oneself and others.
HCM Software
HR + Payroll Software
Talent Management
Workforce Management
Employee Experience
Benefits Administration
Quick Links
Services + Support
855-565-3285
Talk to Sales
855-752-8564
© 2023 Paycor, Inc  |  Refer Paycor  |  Privacy Policy  |  1-800-501-9462 |
*Represents approximately 30,000 corporate clients covering 40,000 businesses employing people