Ask HR: How Can We Attract New Hires?

hr advice, hr management, hr tips, new hires

Talent Management
Last Updated:  August 10, 2015 | Read Time: 3 min
Just when you think you’ve heard it all, one of your employees stumps
you with a question you haven’t heard before. The pros at the HR Support
Center really have heard it all—at least, until tomorrow.
Here is a recent question and expert advice from HR
On-Demand, one of the features available to HR Support Center subscribers.
Answer from Rebecca, HR Pro: You’re not alone. A lot of companies
are having trouble filling openings, especially for jobs with skills in
high demand. The trick is standing out. I recommend really talking up
your benefits, company culture, and perks.
Don’t be shy in your employment ads. Highlight your great insurance
package, 401(k), profit sharing, and competitive salary! In fact, I
recommend publicizing the salary range. A visible salary range will
entice the applicants you want and deter those you don’t.
To really stand out, be sure to mention how great your company culture
is. Share your specific values and explain the creative ways you bring
them into your organization. Be creative with your employment ads. The
look and feel of your ads should tell applicants what kind of company
culture you have. So should your social media presence. Many of your
prime candidates are using social media daily, and this is a
cost-effective way to reach them.
Your best ambassadors, though, are your loyal, happy employees. Ask them
to tell their contacts about the great organization they work for, and
consider implementing a referral bonus.
If a lack of skilled candidates is the issue, you might consider filling
out or expanding your entry level roles. Entry level employees are a
great source for promotion into technical and skilled roles. If you
don’t have any entry level employees, considering creating new positions
for a wider talent pipelines. Just remember that once employees are
trained or have expanded their skills, they expect higher wages.
Rebecca has a diverse background in Human Resources and Training
Management from the temporary staffing and insurance industries. She
received her bachelor’s degree from LaRoche College and previously
served in a variety of HR management positions.
_This Q&A content is taken straight from the experts at HR Support
Center. Click here to learn more about HR Support Center and HR On-Demand; we’d also love the chance to explain in person.
Want to learn more about how to create a development plan for those high-potential employees mentioned in this answer? Check out one of Paycor’s recent webinars on that topic.
 Previous:
Next:
Stay up to date with the latest HR trends

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Employee satisfaction surveys are a great way to stay in tune with what your employees are thinking. Get real insights on how to engage and motivate your team.

        Article      
Read Time: 10 min
Employee burnout can impact work quality and morale. Discover the warning signs for burnout and how to prevent it in your workplace.

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Being an effective leader requires more than just technical knowledge. Create an environment where everyone can thrive and understand emotions in oneself and others.
HCM Software
HR + Payroll Software
Talent Management
Workforce Management
Employee Experience
Benefits Administration
Quick Links
Services + Support
855-565-3285
Talk to Sales
855-752-8564
© 2023 Paycor, Inc  |  Refer Paycor  |  Privacy Policy  |  1-800-501-9462 |
*Represents approximately 30,000 corporate clients covering 40,000 businesses employing people