10 Questions to Assess Your Workplace DE&I Strategy

Diversity, equity and inclusion is a focus for many companies right now. See how your organization stacks up by answering these 10 questions.

Employee Experience
Last Updated: August 4, 2021 | Read Time: 6 min
Diversity, equity, and inclusion is critical for many companies, as studies continue to show the world’s most profitable companies have strong DE&I programs. When job candidates come in for job interviews, you probably are asked about diversity, and are likely to quickly to answer “yes” if you’re asked if you have a diverse company with a culture that values inclusion.
But have you ever taken a step back and asked the questions your future employees might ask as it relates to DE&I? Can you back up the answers you give when talking about your company’s commitment to diversity? The questions below are a great place to start when digging deeper on your diversity, equity and inclusion efforts. If you find you’re falling short in certain areas, you can help drive the changes your organization needs.
As you think about your corporate culture, is DE&I a key part of your organization’s values? Is it something your leaders personally value?
It’s one thing to say you value DE&I, but another to find ways to demonstrate those values on a daily basis. What is your DE&I strategy? Are leaders working to make sure that strategy is executed?
Have you asked—either formally through surveys or informally through management conversations—if people feel they belong? Can employees be their authentic selves at work? Are differences appreciated and celebrated? Companies who are committed to DE&I ask these questions often. And data collected through these pulse surveys helps drive future DE&I practices.
Does your company take steps to recruit from a diverse pool of applicants? Are you marketing and promoting open positions in a way that showcases your commitment to diversity?
Your commitment to DE&I should be evident to a new hire on day one. Including DE&I as part of onboarding and ongoing training demonstrates that commitment clearly.
Industry research makes it clear – diverse companies outperform their less diverse peers. 
Affinity groups give employees an opportunity to express diversity in a way that’s meaningful to them. 
Boardroom diversity is a key indicator of overall DE&I commitment. A recent report from research firm McKinsey shows diverse companies have top leaders that include 20% women and minorities.
Does your organization provide ongoing training for managers to understand how to lead a diverse workforce?
Taking a stand on racial justice or marriage equality can be challenging for some businesses but demonstrates a commitment to diversity. An inclusive environment encompasses all types of diversity and takes steps to make sure everyone is comfortable and welcome. For more info on the subject, check out our on-demand webinar, Creating a More Diverse and Inclusive Workplace.
 Previous:
Next:
Stay up to date with the latest HR trends

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Employee satisfaction surveys are a great way to stay in tune with what your employees are thinking. Get real insights on how to engage and motivate your team.

        Article      
Read Time: 10 min
Employee burnout can impact work quality and morale. Discover the warning signs for burnout and how to prevent it in your workplace.

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Being an effective leader requires more than just technical knowledge. Create an environment where everyone can thrive and understand emotions in oneself and others.
HCM Software
HR + Payroll Software
Talent Management
Workforce Management
Employee Experience
Benefits Administration
Quick Links
Services + Support
855-565-3285
Talk to Sales
855-752-8564
© 2023 Paycor, Inc  |  Refer Paycor  |  Privacy Policy  |  1-800-501-9462 |
*Represents approximately 30,000 corporate clients covering 40,000 businesses employing people