Department of Labor Compliance

Department of Labor wage and hour classifications and laws can be complex, and employer compliance is critical. Find what you need to know about FLSA violations and compliance here.

Workforce Management
Last Updated:  December 28, 2017 | Read Time: 5 min
Many employers struggle with wage and hour classifications. In fact, the Department of Labor estimates that a massive 80% of employers have some degree of non-compliance with wage-hour laws. The wage and hour division collected more than $266 million in back wages for more than 280,000 employees in 2016.
Failing to properly classify employees and pay them correctly can be a nightmare. Not only are you dealing with federal wage and hour laws, but also many states have their own mandates to follow. If the company gets audited and you didn’t get it right, though, the nightmare will get much worse. The DOL has significantly increased enforcement efforts meaning employers are facing enhanced scrutiny. Penalties are severe, and the fines could cost your company big bucks, so it’s important to make sure everything is buttoned up.
If you haven’t evaluated your company’s compliance with the Fair Labor Standards Act lately, it’s time to inspect your current practices and identify and problem areas.
Failure to correctly pay overtime.
This is probably one of the more common violations. Under the FLSA, employees are entitled to time-and-a-half pay when they work more than 40 hours in a single week. Violations can result in civil or criminal action, and employers can be assessed fines of up to $1,100 for each willful or repeated violation.
Not paying for work done off the clock.
Under the FLSA, non-exempt employees must be paid for all hours worked. For example, if an hourly employee is asked to redo a project to correct errors, you cannot withhold pay for that time as punishment.
Illegally deducting money from a paycheck.
Some deductions are not in the control of the employer, such as deductions for taxes, child support or garnishments. But you cannot, for example, take the cost of repairs out of an employee’s paycheck if he or she has damaged company property.
Not paying federal minimum wage.
This is one of the most frequent wage and hour violations. The federal minimum wage is $7.25 per hour, and many states have their own minimum wage laws. If you’re not paying attention and pay an employee below the minimum, just like failing to correctly, pay overtime, you could be assessed fines of up to $1,100 for each willful or repeated violation.
Stealing tips.
This is another pretty common violation. Employers are forbidden from requesting for or accepting tips earned by employees.
Employee Classifications
Employee classification under the FLSA refers to the exempt or non-exempt status of employees. An exempt employee does not receive overtime pay he or she works more than 40 hours in a work week. It also refers to whether the worker is a company employee (receives a W-2) or a contractor, freelancer or consultant (receives a 1099). Ask yourself:
Overtime and Minimum Wage
Under the FLSA, “overtime” means “time actually worked beyond a prescribed threshold.” The normal FLSA work period is the “work week” (7 consecutive days), and the normal FLSA overtime threshold is 40 hours per work week. Federal minimum wage is $7.25 per hour for most employees. Ask yourself:
Off-the-Clock Work
Work that is off the clock is any work done for an employer that isn’t compensated and doesn’t count towards a worker’s weekly hours for overtime purposes. Ask yourself:
Record Keeping
It’s important to maintain meticulous records as it pertains to the FLSA. And, you’re also required by law to store those records for three years after an employee leaves the company. Ask yourself:
A clear understanding of wage and hour laws enables HR to help reduce expenses and helps keep the company out of trouble as a result of fines from violations. For more information, visit our HR Center of Excellence compliance hub.
 Previous:
Next:
Stay up to date with the latest HR trends

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Employee satisfaction surveys are a great way to stay in tune with what your employees are thinking. Get real insights on how to engage and motivate your team.

        Article      
Read Time: 10 min
Employee burnout can impact work quality and morale. Discover the warning signs for burnout and how to prevent it in your workplace.

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Being an effective leader requires more than just technical knowledge. Create an environment where everyone can thrive and understand emotions in oneself and others.
HCM Software
HR + Payroll Software
Talent Management
Workforce Management
Employee Experience
Benefits Administration
Quick Links
Services + Support
855-565-3285
Talk to Sales
855-752-8564
© 2023 Paycor, Inc  |  Refer Paycor  |  Privacy Policy  |  1-800-501-9462 |
*Represents approximately 30,000 corporate clients covering 40,000 businesses employing people