States with Salary History Bans: Employer’s Guide

Job applicants have often been asked about their salary history. But legislation in some states is putting that to an end. See which states have bans.

Talent Management
Last Updated: September 30, 2022 | Read Time: 16 min
Requesting job applicants’ salary histories has been a pretty common practice for employers over the years. Recruiters and hiring managers often use this knowledge to exclude people from the candidate pool, either because the applicant is “too expensive” or their previous salary is so low, hiring managers think the person is poorly qualified or inexperienced.Businesses have also used previous salary information to calculate new hire compensation—a process that can perpetuate pay disparity between women and men. To address this inequality, several states and municipalities have enacted bans on asking for previous salary information, although laws vary in terms, scope and applicability.
To help employers, we’ve prepared a list of states that have enacted salary history bans, which employers are affected and what the specific legislation entails.
One of the goals of the compensation history ban is to help close the gender wage gap. Women often start out earning less than men in their careers because they are paid based on their previous salaries, which tend to be lower than men’s salaries. This cycle continues throughout women’s careers, leading to women earning less than men in general, and it starts during the hiring process.
By prohibiting a salary history inquiry, it also protects potential employees from biased hiring practices based on their previous earnings.
It is illegal, state-wide, in the following states to ask for compensation history during the hiring process:
Alabama, California, Colorado, Connecticut, Delaware, Hawaii, Illinois, Maine, Maryland, Massachusetts, Nevada, New Jersey, New York, North Carolina, Oregon, Pennsylvania, Rhode Island, Vermont, Virginia, and Washington.
Also, it is illegal District-wide in the District of Columbia, and Commonwealth-wide in Puerto Rico.
It’s important to also note that Wisconsin and Michigan have ended salary history bans for all employers except state departments. Local governments in those states may not regulate the information that employers can request or require during the hiring process.
An employer or employment agency cannot ask a job applicant about current or past salary where it is illegal. It has been shown that this information has been used greatly to create such a wide wage gap between men and women.
Some states do not have these laws, so an employer may be able to ask about your current salary expectations. In some cases, the employer will provide the salary range you can expect.
There are a couple of things that employers can do in order to comply with pay history ban laws. First, they must refrain from asking about an applicant’s wage history during the interview process. Additionally, if an employer learns that an employee’s pay has been discriminatory in the past, they can take steps to remedy the situation.
If you are an employer, it is important to be aware of pay history ban laws in your area. These laws are designed to protect employees from discrimination, and they can help ensure that everyone has a fair chance at earning a living wage.
Be sure and let your hiring managers know about all local laws in effect preventing employers from asking questions related to this topic. You can do this through internal communication or by posting a notice in a common area where all current employees will see it. This will allow you to avoid any fines or penalties that could come from breaking these laws. Additionally, avoid relying on past wages when making salary offers to new employees, as some job applicants will volunteer that information without it being asked.
By taking steps to comply with these laws, you can help create a more level playing field for all workers.
If you can’t fathom adding another thing to your recruiting checklist, let Paycor help. Discover how Paycor Recruiting can help you automate your hiring process so you can focus on connecting with top candidates. Paycor’s HR technology platform modernizes every aspect of people management, from recruiting, onboarding and payroll to career development and retention.
 Previous:
Next:
Stay up to date with the latest HR trends

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Employee satisfaction surveys are a great way to stay in tune with what your employees are thinking. Get real insights on how to engage and motivate your team.

        Article      
Read Time: 10 min
Employee burnout can impact work quality and morale. Discover the warning signs for burnout and how to prevent it in your workplace.

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Being an effective leader requires more than just technical knowledge. Create an environment where everyone can thrive and understand emotions in oneself and others.
HCM Software
HR + Payroll Software
Talent Management
Workforce Management
Employee Experience
Benefits Administration
Quick Links
Services + Support
855-565-3285
Talk to Sales
855-752-8564
© 2023 Paycor, Inc  |  Refer Paycor  |  Privacy Policy  |  1-800-501-9462 |
*Represents approximately 30,000 corporate clients covering 40,000 businesses employing people