Active Shooter Policy: What Employers Need to Know in 2020

Planning for active shooters in the workplace has become an unfortunate necessity. Start here to be proactive and put a policy in place.

Employee Experience
Last Updated:  November 18, 2019 | Read Time: 5 min
It’s a sad reality that many people have a looming fear of active shooters in the workplace. Unfortunately, their fears aren’t misguided. According to the FBI, 60% of active shooter incidents occur in businesses. However, as an employer there are actionable steps you can take to prevent an active shooting, ease employee concerns and protect your people.
It’s important that your planning team has representation from departments across the business, as well as first responders. In the same breath, the planning team should be small enough to encourage close collaboration, yet large enough that it doesn’t put the burden on any one person.
Since no profile exists for an active shooter, it can be hard to notice the warning signs. However, there are indicators for potential violent behaviors.

Employers and employees should watch for these behaviors:
In your employee handbook, you should include an active shooter policy. This policy should be designed to provide associates with the information they need to alert others of threats and protect themselves against danger.
Every employee should receive basic training for responding to active shooter events using the Run. Hide. Fight. model.
Provide employees with detailed instructions that they, and their families, can follow during an emergency.

Your employees will most likely have many questions, including:
Take the time to answer these questions and include an FAQ section in your active shooter policy.
Effective training includes drills that involve emergency responders. Take the time to invite these valued partners to your facilities. Conduct walk-throughs of the building and allow law enforcement to provide input on shelter sites and potential watch outs.
Your planning team should trade personal information with first responders, so they always have available contacts in case of an emergency.
Paycor’s Learning Management System (LMS) combines virtual, classroom, mobile and social learning modules on one platform, to enable your employees to learn when, where and how they want. Easily develop and distribute active shooter trainings to associates, track completions and rest assured knowing your employees are properly informed. Learn more about Paycor’s LMS here.

 Previous:
Next:
Stay up to date with the latest HR trends

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Employee satisfaction surveys are a great way to stay in tune with what your employees are thinking. Get real insights on how to engage and motivate your team.

        Article      
Read Time: 10 min
Employee burnout can impact work quality and morale. Discover the warning signs for burnout and how to prevent it in your workplace.

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Being an effective leader requires more than just technical knowledge. Create an environment where everyone can thrive and understand emotions in oneself and others.
HCM Software
HR + Payroll Software
Talent Management
Workforce Management
Employee Experience
Benefits Administration
Quick Links
Services + Support
855-565-3285
Talk to Sales
855-752-8564
© 2023 Paycor, Inc  |  Refer Paycor  |  Privacy Policy  |  1-800-501-9462 |
*Represents approximately 30,000 corporate clients covering 40,000 businesses employing people