Best Practices for Onboarding Employees

Organizations with a structured onboarding process are more likely to attract and retain employees. Improve your employee onboarding process.

Employee Experience
Last Updated: June 13, 2018 | Read Time: 7 min
From first-day to feedback, well-planned onboarding is the first step to creating an engaged and productive workforce.
First impressions are everything, and top performing companies know it. When it comes to onboarding employees, organizations have quickly realized that onboarding is an opportunity that’s not to be wasted. In fact, SHRM found that new hires who receive an excellent onboarding orientation are 69% more likely to stay at a company for at least three years.
Onboarding is the process of helping new hires become familiar with their new company, understand job expectations and assimilate into workplace culture.
Developing a formal onboarding process requires a written plan, detailed steps and desired outcomes. Using a defined strategy helps organize and manage the steps, supporting employees so they can engage quickly and succeed in their new roles. Just because a company adopts a formal process does not mean onboarding new employees can’t be fun. Infuse it with your brand’s personality and let new hires get a sense of your company’s unique style, environment and culture.

A common misconception is that onboarding is a process that begins on a new hire’s first day of work. However, studies indicate the vast majority of top performing companies start onboarding well before that.
Onboarding really begins at recruitment and hiring. As applicants engage with the company, they get an initial sense of the workplace vibe and how it operates. A buttoned-up process communicates the company is organized and efficient. Losing papers, requesting the same item more than once or starting late all could send the message that the company is ill-prepared and doesn’t really respect their time.
Once an applicant has accepted a job offer, organizations begin preparing for the new hire’s arrival. Steps for a successful Phase Two include:
Many companies engage a new hire prior to day one through an onboarding solution . The tool allows managers to welcome the employee with a personalized message, share links about workplace culture, employee handbooks, even details about where to report on their first day. Inviting new hires to fill out forms electronically, such as a W-4, and insurance and payroll documents, improves efficiency and reduces paperwork for hiring administrators. WIth an onboarding solution, hiring managers can check on progress and follow-up as necessary to keep things moving.
Plan ahead and make it a great experience. On an employee’s first day on the job, take them on a facility tour, introduce them to colleagues and show them their new workspace. Demonstrate how to access email accounts and any other company systems. Orientations usually begin on day one, but don’t feel like you have to cram everything into the first day. Onboarding is a process that can last months, even years. Prioritizing orientations and spacing them out reduces information overload and allows new hires a bit of time to adjust.
Make sure managers are available to greet new hires on their first day. Organizing a group lunch helps employees gain a sense of team dynamics and camaraderie. At the very least, it prevents the new person from having to eat alone on their first day.
Another best practice is to connect the new hire with a mentor or buddy. Having a seasoned coworker, they can approach with questions gives employees peace of mind knowing they have someone they can turn to for assistance. Providing guidance and answering questions common new hire questions also saves a manager’s time.
One final way to set an employee up for success on their first day is to give them a concrete task or goal to complete. When employees feel competent and productive, they gain confidence knowing they’ll be able to contribute to the team.

Onboarding doesn’t end after the employee’s first day. They’ll continue to need support, information, and assistance. Facilitate ongoing mentoring, regular team meetings and opportunities to interact with other groups within the organization. Continued clarity around job expectations and performance goals encourages open communication and develops trust.
As new hires begin to settle into their roles, providing feedback will help ensure they are on the right track. Plan regularly scheduled check-ins with mentors and managers, peer reviews, and performance reviews. It’s also important to let the employee know their opinion matters by collecting input about their onboarding experience through debriefings or internal surveys. The more a company can learn and improve its onboarding, the more likely they are to see the benefits of their efforts.
Companies that execute a structured, comprehensive and engaging onboarding process are more likely to attract and keep the best talent. Creating an employee-centric approach sets your new hires up for success and results in lower turnover, higher retention rates and stronger brand loyalty. Job satisfaction starts with feeling productive and valued. Satisfied employees create a constructive workplace culture that directly impacts overall company performance.
Maybe you think you can’t afford the time and money it will take to overhaul your onboarding process, but when you weigh the advantages, can you really afford not to?
Paycor can help you accelerate new hire productivity and impact your bottom line. Check out our Onboarding software, complete with a look at all the ways we can help you create a memorable first impression for your people. And if you’d like to schedule a personalized demo of the onboarding tool, contact us today.
 Previous:
Next:
Stay up to date with the latest HR trends

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Employee satisfaction surveys are a great way to stay in tune with what your employees are thinking. Get real insights on how to engage and motivate your team.

        Article      
Read Time: 10 min
Employee burnout can impact work quality and morale. Discover the warning signs for burnout and how to prevent it in your workplace.

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Being an effective leader requires more than just technical knowledge. Create an environment where everyone can thrive and understand emotions in oneself and others.
HCM Software
HR + Payroll Software
Talent Management
Workforce Management
Employee Experience
Benefits Administration
Quick Links
Services + Support
855-565-3285
Talk to Sales
855-752-8564
© 2023 Paycor, Inc  |  Refer Paycor  |  Privacy Policy  |  1-800-501-9462 |
*Represents approximately 30,000 corporate clients covering 40,000 businesses employing people