Covid-19 Vaccination Tax Credit: How Businesses Can Benefit

The Biden administration is offering tax credits to small businesses who offer paid sick leave in conjunction with the Covid-19 vaccine. See details, here.

Benefits Administration
Last Updated: January 13, 2022 | Read Time: 6 min
 January 13, 2022  Update: The Supreme Court ruled to block the proposed vaccine-or-test mandate for large employers (businesses with 100 employees or more). In a separate ruling, the court voted in favor of a vaccine mandate for workers employed at healthcare facilities that receive federal funding through Medicare and Medicaid. It’s estimated that this ruling could affect more than 17 million workers.
For healthcare organizations and employers that choose to establish vaccination and testing requirements, Paycor is here to support you with an immunization tracker, expert HR advice and a comprehensive suite of products to help keep your business compliant. Contact our team or learn more here.
More than a million Americans are vaccinated every day, with federal and state government doing everything they can to make the process as simple as possible. Sometimes, employees worry about that getting their shot and, potentially, feeling unwell afterwards, will take up too much of their working time. Now, the Biden administration is offering tax credits for small businesses who offer paid sick leave for vaccinations.
Every business has a responsibility to provide a safe workplace for their employees. Right now, a big part of that means ensuring as many workers as possible are vaccinated. Only when a majority of employees are vaccinated can be get back to something close to normal. There’s a place for a vaccination policy, but in most industries mandating vaccines is probably a bad idea.
Instead, employers should concentrate on making it as easy as possible for workers to get vaccinated. Consider subsidizing transport to vaccination sites or even offering cash incentives. Businesses can also invest in materials explaining the importance of vaccinations and outlining how safe and effective they have been shown to be.
It’s natural for employees to worry about having to take time off to get vaccinated. Will they fall behind on important projects or be forced to take personal leave? While many recipients of Covid-19 vaccinations suffer no adverse effects, others may feel ill for several days. It’s common to experience fatigue or fever—that’s why the CDC recommends scheduling vaccinations before non-working days.
HR leaders should reassure their people that their health is the highest priority and give all employees the time they need to receive and recover from vaccinations. Now, small businesses and nonprofits have an added incentive to do this, in the form of a tax credit.
The Biden government is offering the tax credit under the program of tax credits laid out in the American Rescue Plan, which offers compensation to employers who offer paid sick leave to employees for a variety of reasons related to Covid-19.
Here’s what business need to know:
For more details, consults this white house fact sheet.
The Internal Revenue Service (IRS) has offered guidance instructing employers how they can claim the vaccination tax credit. The tax credit, like others under the American Rescue Plan, are calculated against employers’ Medicare taxes. If the full amount of the credit exceeds the value of an employer’s Medicare taxes, the remaining amount of credit will be paid in full.
Employers can claim the credit by reporting their paid sick leave wages for each quarter on Form 941, their federal employment tax return. Eligible employers can keep the federal employment taxes (including both the employee and employer’s share of Medicare and social security taxes) they would otherwise deposit, up to the amount to which they will be entitled by the vaccination tax credit.
If this is insufficient to cover the amount required, employers can request an advance of the credit using Form 7200. For more details, consult the IRS fact sheet.
Paycor builds HR solutions for leaders. With Paycor, you can modernize every aspect of people management, from the way you recruit, onboard and develop your team, to the way you pay and retain them. See how Paycor can help the leaders of your organization solve the problems of today and tomorrow.
 Previous:
Next:
Stay up to date with the latest HR trends

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Employee satisfaction surveys are a great way to stay in tune with what your employees are thinking. Get real insights on how to engage and motivate your team.

        Article      
Read Time: 10 min
Employee burnout can impact work quality and morale. Discover the warning signs for burnout and how to prevent it in your workplace.

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Being an effective leader requires more than just technical knowledge. Create an environment where everyone can thrive and understand emotions in oneself and others.
HCM Software
HR + Payroll Software
Talent Management
Workforce Management
Employee Experience
Benefits Administration
Quick Links
Services + Support
855-565-3285
Talk to Sales
855-752-8564
© 2023 Paycor, Inc  |  Refer Paycor  |  Privacy Policy  |  1-800-501-9462 |
*Represents approximately 30,000 corporate clients covering 40,000 businesses employing people