Tips on Writing Performance Reviews [Sample Comments Included]

Evaluating employees doesn't have to be a painful exercise. Get tips on how to write a performance review for your team members.

Talent Management
Last Updated: April 21, 2021 | Read Time: 8 min
We’ve all been there. It’s performance review time again and you’re desperately searching for what you wrote last year to find inspiration. But it doesn’t have to be this way. This can be avoided if you move to more regular reviews, where feedback becomes more-or-less continuous.
At some point, though, managers will have to put words on paper. Gallup polling shows how difficult it is: only 14.5% of managers strongly agree they are effective at giving feedback. Too often, this means managers simply don’t try: only 17% of Millennials say they receive meaningful feedback at work.
The answer isn’t to give up. Feedback matters. The right feedback rewards employees for their effort so far and inspires them for future success. It keeps them engaged and makes it more likely they’ll stick around. If an employee is underperforming, carefully chosen feedback can help get them back on the right track.
Remember, performance reviews don’t exist just to evaluate past performance. Your biggest goal should be to improve future performance. Think of yourself as a coach, not a manager. It might be tempting to dwell on mistakes. But ask yourself, will negativity help or harm the employee’s development?
Nobody said writing performance reviews would be easy, but these tips will help:
Getting performance reviews wrong can be an engagement killer. While it’s always better to put things in your own words, here are some performance review comments that work:
Paycor builds HR solutions for leaders. With Paycor, you can modernize every aspect of people management, from the way you recruit, onboard and develop your team, to the way you pay and retain them. See how Paycor can help the leaders of your organization solve the problems of today and tomorrow.
 Previous:
Next:
Stay up to date with the latest HR trends

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Employee satisfaction surveys are a great way to stay in tune with what your employees are thinking. Get real insights on how to engage and motivate your team.

        Article      
Read Time: 10 min
Employee burnout can impact work quality and morale. Discover the warning signs for burnout and how to prevent it in your workplace.

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Being an effective leader requires more than just technical knowledge. Create an environment where everyone can thrive and understand emotions in oneself and others.
HCM Software
HR + Payroll Software
Talent Management
Workforce Management
Employee Experience
Benefits Administration
Quick Links
Services + Support
855-565-3285
Talk to Sales
855-752-8564
© 2023 Paycor, Inc  |  Refer Paycor  |  Privacy Policy  |  1-800-501-9462 |
*Represents approximately 30,000 corporate clients covering 40,000 businesses employing people