About HR Center of Excellence

The HR Center of Excellence (HR COE) is your action plan, grounded in Payco’s data, experience and research, designed in a singular focus on helping medium-to-small sized business optimize HR to make a lasting impact on their organization.

Talent Management
Last Updated:  December 18, 2017 | Read Time: 2 min
The HR Department, with its diverse mix of skill sets and its unique perspective on business operations, is positioned as never before to add strategic value to businesses on critical issues across the employee lifespan, from recruiting and onboarding to talent development and retention.
Many organizations don’t see the tangible returns on investing in modern HR. As a result, HR teams are often limited by inefficient manual processes. The goal of the HR Center of Excellence is to change that.
The HR Center of Excellence (HR COE) is your action plan, grounded in Paycor’s data, experience and research, designed in a singular focus on helping medium-to-small sized business optimize HR to make a lasting impact on their organization.
Paycor is a trusted partner to more than 31,000 small and medium-sized businesses. Known for delivering modern, intuitive recruiting, HR and payroll solutions, Paycor partners with businesses to optimize the management of their most valuable asset — their people. Paycor’s personalized support and user-friendly technology ensure that key business processes, including recruiting, onboarding, reporting, timekeeping, compliance and payroll, run smoothly. Paycor’s people operations solutions are recommended by today’s most innovative brokers, bankers, and CPAs. Learn how Paycor can transform your business by starting a conversation at https://www.paycor.com.
 Previous:
Next:
Stay up to date with the latest HR trends

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Employee satisfaction surveys are a great way to stay in tune with what your employees are thinking. Get real insights on how to engage and motivate your team.

        Article      
Read Time: 10 min
Employee burnout can impact work quality and morale. Discover the warning signs for burnout and how to prevent it in your workplace.

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Being an effective leader requires more than just technical knowledge. Create an environment where everyone can thrive and understand emotions in oneself and others.
HCM Software
HR + Payroll Software
Talent Management
Workforce Management
Employee Experience
Benefits Administration
Quick Links
Services + Support
855-565-3285
Talk to Sales
855-752-8564
© 2023 Paycor, Inc  |  Refer Paycor  |  Privacy Policy  |  1-800-501-9462 |
*Represents approximately 30,000 corporate clients covering 40,000 businesses employing people