7 Characteristics of a Good Work Ethic

Employees who have good work ethics can be very helpful for companies. Read our blog post to learn about seven characteristics of a good work ethic.

Employee Experience
Last Updated: December 2, 2020 | Read Time: 7 min
2020 was up there with the greatest crises in HR history. Amidst the challenges, though, there’s been something positive—we learned a lot about the drive and resilience of our employees. The ones who kept produced great work rather than excuses, no matter the challenges they faced—and even when their organizations moved remote-first.
We often talk about hiring “top talent”, but have you ever considered that it’s the people who show up every day and reliably get things done that are the real drivers of business success? That’s why we thought it was worth taking just a moment to celebrate and give a little definition to a humble and often overlooked quality: work ethic.
Finding employees with a growth mindset is not enough, though—managers must encourage it and, more importantly, facilitate their employees’ learning processes. Utilizing learning management software can help companies easily keep track of this process. Otherwise, with career and personal development missing from part of your employee experience, you’ll struggle to hire—and keep—the best talent available. 
If all the good work ethic characteristics align in one candidate, a hiring manager can be confident that they will find a way to succeed—no matter their talent level. Yet even with a good work ethic traits, staff need to be engaged and encourage. It’s the job of HR to not only seek but to facilitate and nurture these traits. With the right people, along with the right setup and support—hard work can come easy.
 Previous:
Next:
Stay up to date with the latest HR trends

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Employee satisfaction surveys are a great way to stay in tune with what your employees are thinking. Get real insights on how to engage and motivate your team.

        Article      
Read Time: 10 min
Employee burnout can impact work quality and morale. Discover the warning signs for burnout and how to prevent it in your workplace.

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Being an effective leader requires more than just technical knowledge. Create an environment where everyone can thrive and understand emotions in oneself and others.
HCM Software
HR + Payroll Software
Talent Management
Workforce Management
Employee Experience
Benefits Administration
Quick Links
Services + Support
855-565-3285
Talk to Sales
855-752-8564
© 2023 Paycor, Inc  |  Refer Paycor  |  Privacy Policy  |  1-800-501-9462 |
*Represents approximately 30,000 corporate clients covering 40,000 businesses employing people