2023 Small Business Health Insurance Requirements

Health insurance is a complicated topic, especially for small businesses. Our guide on health insurance requirements for SMBs in 2023 can help.

Workforce Management
Last Updated: January 20, 2023 | Read Time: 6 min
Small business owners tend to wear a lot of hats. That includes insurance experts. The problem is, many business leaders who are in charge of evaluating benefits packages are in the dark about the myriad compliance requirements surrounding health insurance coverage. If your company plans to provide health insurance for employees, it’s important that you understand your choices and the laws around them.
If a small business is not directly offering employees a health care coverage plan, the business owner still has several alternative ways to assist employees with their health care needs.
If your business employs fifty or more employees, you need to be aware of recent changes to health plan cost-sharing limits. Employer-sponsored health coverage must not exceed 9.12% of an employee’s income if it is to satisfy ACA affordability requirements for 2023. This is down from 9.61% in 2022. Make sure this change hasn’t pushed your plan into ‘unaffordable’ territory.
When it comes to compliance when offering insurance, not only do businesses with 50 or more employees need to concern themselves with federal laws around health programs, they also have to be familiar with laws of the states they operate in.
Pro Tip: familiarize yourself with your state’s Department of Insurance to remain compliant.
If your company decides it’s ready to provide health insurance for your employees, We can make the task much easier. Paycor’s Benefits Administration Software is the more efficient way to get all of your people on board so you can get back to focusing on your HR strategy.
 Previous:
Next:
Stay up to date with the latest HR trends

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Employee satisfaction surveys are a great way to stay in tune with what your employees are thinking. Get real insights on how to engage and motivate your team.

        Article      
Read Time: 10 min
Employee burnout can impact work quality and morale. Discover the warning signs for burnout and how to prevent it in your workplace.

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Being an effective leader requires more than just technical knowledge. Create an environment where everyone can thrive and understand emotions in oneself and others.
HCM Software
HR + Payroll Software
Talent Management
Workforce Management
Employee Experience
Benefits Administration
Quick Links
Services + Support
855-565-3285
Talk to Sales
855-752-8564
© 2023 Paycor, Inc  |  Refer Paycor  |  Privacy Policy  |  1-800-501-9462 |
*Represents approximately 30,000 corporate clients covering 40,000 businesses employing people