Common Recruiting Challenges And How To Manage Them

Recruiting new employees doesn't have to be the challenge it once was. Read how to streamline the hiring process and get the right talent.

Talent Management
Last Updated:  February 4, 2019 | Read Time: 3 min
Attracting talent is a top initiative for many companies. Yet the
recruiting process has traditionally faced some challenges: difficulty
sourcing top talent, a lengthy process, high cost per hire and other
issues. It’s no surprise that many companies outsource some or all of
the process to a recruitment agency.
With so many tasks to manage, it’s easy to see how challenges can arise.
Three of the biggest challenges for recruiters are finding top talent,
streamlining the hiring process and managing new hire onboarding.
One of the major challenges for companies is finding the best match for
open positions. To figure out where to concentrate your efforts, ask the
sources of some of your best hires. Or better yet, ask your best hires
directly about where to find good people. Many companies now offer an
employee referral program where existing employees are rewarded for
referring candidates who become hires. In addition, leverage
digital strategies for recruiting top candidates, including LinkedIn.
Outside headhunters or specialized niche recruiters may be also be
valuable resources.
A cumbersome, manual recruiting process can also pose a major challenge
for employers. Recruiting processes can be simplified and optimized by using recruiting and applicant tracking software. Recruiters and interviewers can update and edit information anytime,
from anywhere. They can easily post new job openings, see where current
applicants are in the process, match applicants to open positions and
analyze where bottlenecks are slowing things down. Automating the
recruiting process saves valuable time and energy, and provides a better
hiring experience for recruiters and applicants. Also, use free resources, like this one, when you make a job offer to a candidate.
you to see where your new hires stand in their orientation programs with
the training administration feature, which lets you to schedule courses
and track attendance for different sessions. With support from the right
HR technology, new hire onboarding can be a smooth process.
To learn more about how Paycor’s HR Software can
help make recruiting simpler and more effective, contact
us today.
 Previous:
Next:
Stay up to date with the latest HR trends

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Employee satisfaction surveys are a great way to stay in tune with what your employees are thinking. Get real insights on how to engage and motivate your team.

        Article      
Read Time: 10 min
Employee burnout can impact work quality and morale. Discover the warning signs for burnout and how to prevent it in your workplace.

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Being an effective leader requires more than just technical knowledge. Create an environment where everyone can thrive and understand emotions in oneself and others.
HCM Software
HR + Payroll Software
Talent Management
Workforce Management
Employee Experience
Benefits Administration
Quick Links
Services + Support
855-565-3285
Talk to Sales
855-752-8564
© 2023 Paycor, Inc  |  Refer Paycor  |  Privacy Policy  |  1-800-501-9462 |
*Represents approximately 30,000 corporate clients covering 40,000 businesses employing people