The Leader’s Guide to Employee Feedback

Giving employees feedback is a balancing act. Coaching tends to be more well received than managing. Get tips on how to provide feedback to your team, here.

Talent Management
Last Updated: May 25, 2021 | Read Time: 8 min
Employees love feedback. They want more of it and they want it to be more meaningful. This is great news for leaders. But you can only take advantage of employees’ desire to develop if you let go of a “manager mindset” and start thinking of yourself as a coach.
A leader is around to help people help reach their potential. Make it a priority to create an environment where learning is at the heart of every interaction. Feedback isn’t an annual event—it’s a continuous conversation. The better your feedback, the faster your employees will develop.
Let’s start with the fundamentals. How can leaders give better feedback?
Time is valuable. Make the most of your employee feedback sessions by following these best practices:
The pandemic meant that many organizations joined the remote-work revolution a lot faster than they ever planned. The reality is, it’s been a challenge. Leaders have realized that top performers in the workplace can easily become isolated and disengaged when working from home.
It’s not true for everyone—there are many introverts who thrive working remotely. What’s certain, though, is that effective remote leadership requires new thinking about feedback. Here’s where to start: 
Paycor builds HR solutions for leaders. With Paycor, you can modernize every aspect of people management, from the way you recruit, onboard and develop your team, to the way you pay and retain them. See how Paycor can help the leaders of your organization solve the problems of today and tomorrow.
 Previous:
Next:
Stay up to date with the latest HR trends

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Employee satisfaction surveys are a great way to stay in tune with what your employees are thinking. Get real insights on how to engage and motivate your team.

        Article      
Read Time: 10 min
Employee burnout can impact work quality and morale. Discover the warning signs for burnout and how to prevent it in your workplace.

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Being an effective leader requires more than just technical knowledge. Create an environment where everyone can thrive and understand emotions in oneself and others.
HCM Software
HR + Payroll Software
Talent Management
Workforce Management
Employee Experience
Benefits Administration
Quick Links
Services + Support
855-565-3285
Talk to Sales
855-752-8564
© 2023 Paycor, Inc  |  Refer Paycor  |  Privacy Policy  |  1-800-501-9462 |
*Represents approximately 30,000 corporate clients covering 40,000 businesses employing people