What to Look for in an Applicant Tracking System

Finding the right Applicant Tracking System to help your company recruit and hire can be a challenge. Use our ATS buying guide to help.

Talent Management
Last Updated:  March 25, 2020 | Read Time: 5 min
So, you’re looking to buy an Applicant Tracking System (ATS)? Or you’re at least interested in learning more about how an ATS can help improve recruiting and hiring at your company?
No doubt, understanding and evaluating recruitment technology is hard. With so many different tools on the market and 200+ different Applicant Tracking Systems available, finding the right ATS for your business can be a challenge. To help, we created “Choosing the Right ATS”, which outlines everything from why you need an ATS and what features you should look for, to key questions you should ask on an ATS demo and how to build a business case for one.
Here’s a brief summary of some of the key points covered in our ATS buyer’s guide.
For all you beginners out there, we start off with a quick overview of what an ATS is and how it will help your company throughout the three stages of recruiting:
There’s a reason that 75% of companies use an Applicant Tracking System to manage their recruiting and hiring. Once you have a firm understanding of what an ATS is, we dive into the below reasons as to why you need one:
With so many different Applicant Tracking Systems on the market (each coming with their own set of bells and whistles), knowing which features to look for is a challenge. To help with this, we break down the core features you need amongst the three stages of recruiting below. For a full explanation of the core ATS features that you should be looking for, download our free ATS buying guide here.
The foundation of successful recruiting starts with the quality and quantity of your candidates. For this reason, your ATS feature checklist should start with functionality that helps you get your jobs in front of quality candidates, create a candidate experience that drives them to apply, and makes it easy for you to engage with them:
Getting candidates is the easy part. Now comes the features for actually communicating with them, managing them, and driving them through your interview stages – all while keeping your hiring team involved in the process:
Even with the world’s best interview process, if you can’t effectively close candidates at the job offer stage and get them onboarded efficiently, you are doomed to fail. For this reason, choose an ATS that gives you the tools for creating a consistent, efficient approach to closing candidates and onboarding them through the following features:
Keep in mind, when evaluating different Applicant Tracking Systems, your checklist shouldn’t only consist of features. There are several other aspects to factor in as well:
For more expert advice on how to critically evaluate HR software before you buy, see our HCM technology buyer’s guide here.
Finding, interviewing and hiring talented people are the most important challenges growing businesses face. Paycor Recruiting is a software solution designed and built by recruiters for recruiters and HR hiring teams to help you solve your hiring problems and optimize your recruiting process.

 Previous:
Next:
Stay up to date with the latest HR trends

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Employee satisfaction surveys are a great way to stay in tune with what your employees are thinking. Get real insights on how to engage and motivate your team.

        Article      
Read Time: 10 min
Employee burnout can impact work quality and morale. Discover the warning signs for burnout and how to prevent it in your workplace.

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Being an effective leader requires more than just technical knowledge. Create an environment where everyone can thrive and understand emotions in oneself and others.
HCM Software
HR + Payroll Software
Talent Management
Workforce Management
Employee Experience
Benefits Administration
Quick Links
Services + Support
855-565-3285
Talk to Sales
855-752-8564
© 2023 Paycor, Inc  |  Refer Paycor  |  Privacy Policy  |  1-800-501-9462 |
*Represents approximately 30,000 corporate clients covering 40,000 businesses employing people