7 Payroll Reports That Make Payruns Error-Free

Do you know if your company is compliant with payroll regulations? Learn the 7 payroll reports that will help your company mitigate risk.

Employee Experience
Last Updated:  January 27, 2020 | Read Time: 4 min
No matter what product or service you sell, your company runs payroll. And that’s a good thing! Employers like earning revenue, employees like being paid and the payroll department or payroll administrator likes it when the process goes off without a hitch.
But when businesses choose to process payroll on their own, without the expertise of a provider, questions like the ones below start to create uncertainties and anxiety.
In this article, we’ll highlight payroll reports your provider should offer to help ensure you’re in compliance with reporting requirements and your payroll remains error-free.
This report provides you with all the data you’re about to submit for a particularly payrun. Review your pre-post payroll report carefully.
Your employee export report gives you pay detail and totals for each employee by department. It also captures the proportion of time/earnings this payment represents from what is allocated to that department
A payrun audit report helps identify inaccurate entries before submitting. This report alerts you to potential discrepancies around any fields including missing deductions, 401k changes, and time sheet mismatches
A single source report summarizing your total payrun cost. Your total payable figure includes checks and direct deposits made to employees and outside agencies—including tax withholdings and your tax liabilities
Like the Payroll Journal, the Labor Distribution report offers pay details including wages, deductions, and taxes for all departments. The report details amounts due to employees who work in multiple departments according to departmental time/earning allocations
This report lists all active employees who will not have deductions taken during this payrun because they are not earning a paycheck.
Unpaid employees are those who are active but will not be receiving a paycheck. Comparing this report to approved time entries is a good way to double-check no one is missing an anticipated payment.

Running these seven payroll reports prior to each payrun allows you to identify discrepancies before any money is transferred. Instead of fixing problems later—which can be time-consuming and costly—staying on top of the data keeps your stress level down and your payroll error-free. And when payroll is accurate, required monthly and quarterly reports are a breeze.
The real key to successful payroll processing is having the right tool in place that can take care of the heavy lifting for you. Look for systems with features like:
If you’re in the market for a payroll solution that offers stress-free tax compliance, engaging employee self-service and detailed reporting capabilities, look no further than Paycor. Take a guided tour of our products to learn how the payroll software can help your team process payroll quickly and accurately.
 Previous:
Next:
Stay up to date with the latest HR trends

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Employee satisfaction surveys are a great way to stay in tune with what your employees are thinking. Get real insights on how to engage and motivate your team.

        Article      
Read Time: 10 min
Employee burnout can impact work quality and morale. Discover the warning signs for burnout and how to prevent it in your workplace.

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Being an effective leader requires more than just technical knowledge. Create an environment where everyone can thrive and understand emotions in oneself and others.
HCM Software
HR + Payroll Software
Talent Management
Workforce Management
Employee Experience
Benefits Administration
Quick Links
Services + Support
855-565-3285
Talk to Sales
855-752-8564
© 2023 Paycor, Inc  |  Refer Paycor  |  Privacy Policy  |  1-800-501-9462 |
*Represents approximately 30,000 corporate clients covering 40,000 businesses employing people