Employer Student Loan Repayment Program: 5 Tips for 2023

Recent legislation makes employer student loan repayment programs more valuable than ever before. Read our tips on winning the battle for top talent.

Benefits Administration
Last Updated: December 20, 2022 | Read Time: 7 min
As voluntary turnover hits record highs, employers are on the lookout for any edge in the fight to attract—and retain—top talent. Companies are getting increasingly creative in the benefits they offer employees and, with student loan debt skyrocketing, repayment programs can be an attractive perk. The good news is, these programs recently became more affordable.
Through 2025, employers can offer up to $5,250 in student loan repayment benefits without paying a dime in tax. This is thanks to the Consolidated Appropriations Act, signed into law in 2020 as part of pandemic relief efforts, which expanded Section 127 of the IRS code. The number of companies offering repayment programs is still small, but likely to rise going forward, especially  with the current moratorium on student loan repayment. The student loan repayment pause has been extended until the U.S. Department of Education can either carry out the debt relief program or when current litigation is resolved. Student loan payments will restart 60 days following. If the debt relief program has not been implemented and litigation has not been resolved by June 30, 2023—payments will resume 60 days after that.
Currently nearly 43 million Americans owe more than $1.6T in student loans. It’s the second highest U.S. debt category—behind mortgages—and default rates have been on the rise. The average federal student loan debt balance is nearly $38K, while the total average balance (including private loan debt) may be more than $42K. More than 38% of Americans are saddled with loan amounts of more than $100,000. It’s not too surprising to understand the enormous appeal a student loan repayment program would have to job candidates.
Companies that offer student loan debt relief can more easily attract and retain talent. In fact, studies indicate that 86% of workers between the ages of 22 and 33 would commit to an employer for five years if the employer offered a student loan repayment program. Another aspect of the employee experience to consider when thinking about implementing a loan repayment program is engagement. The very real fear and anxiety suffered by workers who are stressed out about defaulting on their student loan payments can take a toll on their performance.
Creating a program to help recruit the brightest and the best to your company can easily be achieved. The quickest way to set one up is to take a look into financial organizations that already have a program management platform in place. These programs enable your company to make after-tax contributions towards your employees’ loans.
If you want to DIY it, a few points to consider include:
Back in 2018, the IRS approved a novel method Abbot Laboratories developed to help its employees pay off their student loan debt. They make a matching contribution that equals 5% of the employee’s compensation if:
The program is an attractive benefit, especially for those employees who think they can’t save for retirement due to hefty loan payments. This program helps them pay off their loans without sacrificing the contribution of an employer match. And because the company’s contributions are payroll tax free and not subject to federal income tax withholding, the program offers significant tax advantages.
Paycor builds HR solutions for leaders. With Paycor, you can modernize every aspect of people management, from the way you recruit, onboard and develop your team, to the way you pay and retain them. See how Paycor can help the leaders of your organization solve the problems of today and tomorrow.
Take Online Tour
 Previous:
Next:
Stay up to date with the latest HR trends

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Employee satisfaction surveys are a great way to stay in tune with what your employees are thinking. Get real insights on how to engage and motivate your team.

        Article      
Read Time: 10 min
Employee burnout can impact work quality and morale. Discover the warning signs for burnout and how to prevent it in your workplace.

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Being an effective leader requires more than just technical knowledge. Create an environment where everyone can thrive and understand emotions in oneself and others.
HCM Software
HR + Payroll Software
Talent Management
Workforce Management
Employee Experience
Benefits Administration
Quick Links
Services + Support
855-565-3285
Talk to Sales
855-752-8564
© 2023 Paycor, Inc  |  Refer Paycor  |  Privacy Policy  |  1-800-501-9462 |
*Represents approximately 30,000 corporate clients covering 40,000 businesses employing people