Paycor Recruiting Reporting and Analytics

HR functions such as recruiting and hiring can be improved with data. See how reporting and analytics dashboards can help.

Talent Management
Last Updated:  October 4, 2019 | Read Time: 6 min
 
Our Candidate and Recruiting Dashboards offer “air traffic control” for your entire recruiting pipeline. Recruiters get immediate access to the most common questions in hiring and can build reports with a few clicks. HR Directors can detect bottlenecks and stay up-to-date on the hiring process. Executives can make data-driven hiring decisions and improve ROI.
Recruiters
HR Directors
Executives
Feature Highlights
 
Real-time answers
Starting right from your homepage, Paycor Recruiting presents an easy-to-read dashboard. Your team can log in and track status of any job in real-time. Paycor Recruiting comes standard with intuitive dashboards for hiring and recruiting that allow you to monitor timely processes like job and offer approvals, background checks, recruiting KPIs, and more. Drill into areas of interest to investigate bottlenecks and discover opportunities.
Task management with visual queues
Dashboards serve as task managers for busy recruiters and hiring managers. Rather than sifting through detailed reports and emails, your employees can see at a glance what is on their plate at that moment and get to work.
Pre-built recruiting dashboards
Dashboards serve as task managers for busy recruiters and hiring managers. We’ve built all of the critical overview pages so you don’t have to. Approval processes in the pipeline, managing background checks, viewing assessments, and of course showing you where your top candidates are coming from and where the bottlenecks in the process are. Our dashboards and hiring analytics make sure nothing slips through the cracks.
Custom hiring reports
We get it, sometimes out of the box reporting just isn’t enough. Every field of Paycor Recruiting’s database is available to report on. Even custom fields that you create can be used to create the report of your dreams. Create your favorite reports, save them, and run them anytime without bogging down other users. Paycor Recruiting will even help you format your reports making it easy to send production-quality data to managers and executives.
Paycor Recruiting has the most up-to-date, EEO and OFCCP compliance tracking and reporting tools available. Whether you just crested 50 employees or have a federal contract, we got you covered.
Paycor Recruiting has the most complete EEOC & OFCCP compliance hiring reports because it automatically tracks and stores all compliance data.
Recruiters
HR Directors
Executives
Recruiters
With Paycor Recruiting’s compliance tools, Recruiters no longer need to worry about manual data capture. Built-in EEO and OFCCP functionality like reasons for non-selection, minimum qualifications, Section 503 and more keep you safe, allowing you to focus on activities that get candidates in the door.
HR Directors
Thanks to Paycor Recruiting’s compliance functionality, HR Directors have immediate access to pre-built compliance reports. Easily create applicant flow logs as well as hire and offer logs so that you can be prepared in the event of an audit.
Executives
Avoid costly audits and have peace of mind knowing that your organization’s recruiting practices adhere to EEO and OFCCP hiring compliance standards. Keep track of your team’s activities and always stay ahead of any compliance issues.
 
 
Day one compliance
Paycor Recruiting comes equipped with compliance tools that provide insurance for your recruiting program. EEO, OFCCP, reasons for non-selection, minimum requirements, Section 503, VEVRAA updates and more. It’s all in Paycor Recruiting and it’s already built for you to use or create custom questions more in-line with your brand. Hundreds of government contractors rely on Paycor Recruiting every day to manage recruitment compliance. Plus, all of this data is stored online and you can control who has access to view the information. Do away with paper files in cabinets that take up valuable space and could be compromised at any point.
Built-in reporting
Paycor Recruiting will consistently store and track all critical hiring compliance data needed to create your applicant flow logs as well as hire and offer logs. Paycor Recruiting has your back if an audit should ever occur with pre-built reports based on OFCCP requirements and EEOC guidelines. Whether you’re a government contractor or a growing company with 50+ employees, recruitment compliance is a front-of-mind topic for recruiters and human resources pros. While OFCCP compliance regulations are specifically for employers with federal contracts, it is the responsibility of every U.S.-based employer to eliminate discrimination in their hiring processes.
Take a guided tour of our products to learn how the recruiting and reporting analytics solutions can help your team get answers to help the entire recruiting pipeline.
 Previous:
Next:
Stay up to date with the latest HR trends

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Employee satisfaction surveys are a great way to stay in tune with what your employees are thinking. Get real insights on how to engage and motivate your team.

        Article      
Read Time: 10 min
Employee burnout can impact work quality and morale. Discover the warning signs for burnout and how to prevent it in your workplace.

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Being an effective leader requires more than just technical knowledge. Create an environment where everyone can thrive and understand emotions in oneself and others.
HCM Software
HR + Payroll Software
Talent Management
Workforce Management
Employee Experience
Benefits Administration
Quick Links
Services + Support
855-565-3285
Talk to Sales
855-752-8564
© 2023 Paycor, Inc  |  Refer Paycor  |  Privacy Policy  |  1-800-501-9462 |
*Represents approximately 30,000 corporate clients covering 40,000 businesses employing people