Employee’s Guide to Working from Home

Did the coronavirus pandemic force you to work from home? Here are the survival tips to help you stay productive and sane.

Employee Experience
Last Updated: March 16, 2020 | Read Time: 4 min
Fortunately, most people have never had to deal with a massive virus outbreak such as the one we’re experiencing now. Unfortunately, that makes managing the situation with the COVID-19 pandemic an entirely new realm for both businesses and employees. Along with diligent handwashing, social distancing is key to preventing the spread of the disease.
In response, many employers are adopting risk reduction strategies and encouraging employees to work from home (WFH) for at least two weeks. For companies that are largely made up of offsite workers, this approach generally won’t pose a challenge; however, many companies have never worked that way and, as a result, either have no formal policy or they’re frantically creating one.
Get A Work From Home Agreement Template Here.
If your duties can be conducted remotely and you’re asked to work from home, here are a few tips to make the time away from the office productive and successful.
Working from home isn’t for everybody, especially if you’re an extrovert who thrives in an office environment. Just like the other epidemics and pandemics (H1N1, Bird Flu, etc.) this virus won’t be around forever. In the meantime, try to stick to business as usual.
Employees can punch in and out on our mobile app from home.
Employees can receive emails and push notifications on shift updates and changes while working from home.
Fully customizable group chat allows you to attach documents and to communicate with pre-selected teams (e.g., all employees or all managers, etc.).
 Previous:
Next:
Stay up to date with the latest HR trends

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Employee satisfaction surveys are a great way to stay in tune with what your employees are thinking. Get real insights on how to engage and motivate your team.

        Article      
Read Time: 10 min
Employee burnout can impact work quality and morale. Discover the warning signs for burnout and how to prevent it in your workplace.

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Being an effective leader requires more than just technical knowledge. Create an environment where everyone can thrive and understand emotions in oneself and others.
HCM Software
HR + Payroll Software
Talent Management
Workforce Management
Employee Experience
Benefits Administration
Quick Links
Services + Support
855-565-3285
Talk to Sales
855-752-8564
© 2023 Paycor, Inc  |  Refer Paycor  |  Privacy Policy  |  1-800-501-9462 |
*Represents approximately 30,000 corporate clients covering 40,000 businesses employing people