Tip Pooling Strategies for Restaurants 

Are you considering implementing tip pooling at your restaurant? Be sure you understand how it works and state regulations. Get the details here.

Workforce Management
Last Updated: June 4, 2021 | Read Time: 6 min
Ask any group of restaurant employees together about pooling tips, you’re likely to get many strong opinions. The practice can be helpful in building teamwork among the staff, encouraging better service (and happier customers). However, there are several things to consider before setting up this arrangement.
First, to clarify tip pooling vs. tip sharing: tip pooling is the practice of taking all server tips and dividing them among the wait staff at the end of the shift. These tips can be divided by role or the number of hours worked. Tip sharing is when wait staff shares tips earned with back-of-the-house employees (dishwashers, for example) at the end of a shift.
Both tip pooling and sharing can work for certain restaurants. Typically, these plans work best in environments where multiple staff members interact with a customer. For example, a bakery or café might have one person who takes an order, the barista who makes your frothy caffeinated treat, and yet another team member who plates your scone and cashes you out. Each individual helps to make your experience better, and your tip reflects your overall satisfaction with the service you received every step of the way.
Tip pooling also can work well in catering or event venues, where large parties need multiple people to ensure guests’ needs are met, and there generally is a standard service charge applied to the bill.
When considering a tip pooling or sharing agreement, it’s helpful to understand the regulations around the practice before considering any plan. These regulations changed at the end of 2020, with new rules now allowing tip pooling to extend to back-of-the-house staff in certain cases. Some details of the new law and other considerations:
Utah requires a valid tip pooling agreement or policy to be shared and signed by employees and employees must be notified in writing if there is a change to this policy.
Two states allow tip pooling with voluntary exceptions, as explained below:
Tip pooling cannot be required in Kentucky, Minnesota, Montana, New Hampshire and Wyoming.
If you live in a state that allows tip pooling (whether or not it’s required by law), it’s a good idea to create a workplace policy so everyone is on the same page. To start, outline who is eligible to be part of the tip pool. For example, some policies stipulate a minimum amount an employee needs to make each month to be eligible. You’ll also want to outline how tip credits are used to ensure hourly wages comply with the minimum wage law.
The above regulations are crucial to consider before starting a tip pooling program, but equally crucial is understanding your team’s dynamic, type of foodservice establishment and overall enthusiasm for the program before you set up a tip pooling system.
For information on how Paycor can help you with recruiting, hiring, onboarding and paying employees for your restaurant, contact a Paycor sales representative today!
 Previous:
Next:
Stay up to date with the latest HR trends

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Employee satisfaction surveys are a great way to stay in tune with what your employees are thinking. Get real insights on how to engage and motivate your team.

        Article      
Read Time: 10 min
Employee burnout can impact work quality and morale. Discover the warning signs for burnout and how to prevent it in your workplace.

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Being an effective leader requires more than just technical knowledge. Create an environment where everyone can thrive and understand emotions in oneself and others.
HCM Software
HR + Payroll Software
Talent Management
Workforce Management
Employee Experience
Benefits Administration
Quick Links
Services + Support
855-565-3285
Talk to Sales
855-752-8564
© 2023 Paycor, Inc  |  Refer Paycor  |  Privacy Policy  |  1-800-501-9462 |
*Represents approximately 30,000 corporate clients covering 40,000 businesses employing people