360 Feedback in Your Workplace, Implementation Checklist

The 360 degree employee feedback process gathers input from peers, supervisors, direct reports and subordinates. Learn how to properly implement it and get a checklist here.

Talent Management
Last Updated: May 25, 2021 | Read Time: 10 min
When it’s time for performance reviews, 360 feedback is often an afterthought. Sure, it’s used at more than 85% of Fortune 500 companies and countless smaller businesses—but is it used effectively? The success of 360 feedback depends on how it’s implemented. Without the right planning, it takes up a lot of time with little reward. Done right, it can transform your performance management process.
360 feedback is the antidote to traditional hierarchical feedback, where the performance review process is limited to just a manager and who they supervise. 360 feedback is about collecting feedback from all relevant stakeholders, both internally (supervisors, peers, direct reports, subordinates) and externally (clients, vendors, board members).
Ultimately, the purpose of 360 feedback is to gather data on employee skills, competencies and work behaviors. The data collected can be used as a benchmark within an employee’s development plan or as part of the overall performance management process.
360 feedback is the antidote to traditional hierarchical feedback, where the performance review process is limited to just a manager and who they supervise. 360 feedback is about collecting feedback from all relevant stakeholders, both internally (supervisors, peers, direct reports, subordinates) and externally (clients, vendors, board members).
Ultimately, the purpose of 360 feedback is to gather data on employee skills, competencies and work behaviors. The data collected can be used as a benchmark within an employee’s development plan or as part of the overall talent development process.
Improved Employee EngagementAll these factors combine to produce an end result of engaged employees, who are aligned with their colleagues, well placed to develop and motivated to succeed.
So far, we’ve been concentrating on the best case scenario, when you get your 360 feedback process just right. In reality, there are many ways you can slip up on the way:
These questions will help you clarify what you want to achieve, and how you’ll go about it:
Now, let’s take a look at critical steps for implementing 360 feedback in your workplace.
Create Management Alignment and Provide SupportAs with any change management initiative, alignment with management or leadership is key. If your stakeholders are not aligned and supporting the process, you won’t get employees to prioritize taking time out to give feedback.
Define the Purpose of Your Program
Communicate the Purpose of 360 FeedbackCommunicating throughout the planning and implementation process of 360 feedback will minimize the fear in the process. Think about the how, when and why, for all aspects of the program.
Train and Educate EmployeesDepending on how your organization likes to facilitate providing and receiving feedback, leadership can spearhead training for teams to try 360 feedback.
Define Next Steps and ExpectationsAll participants should know how the process works and best practices. Are there tools to create a development plans and support for development goals? Who is accountable, and how?
Measure Success and Seek Improvements Celebrate successes and assess what is working and what’s not working. Make modifications as needed.
Paycor builds HR solutions for leaders. With Paycor, you can modernize every aspect of people management, from the way you recruit, onboard and develop your team, to the way you pay and retain them. See how Paycor can help the leaders of your organization solve the problems of today and tomorrow.
 Previous:
Next:
Stay up to date with the latest HR trends

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Employee satisfaction surveys are a great way to stay in tune with what your employees are thinking. Get real insights on how to engage and motivate your team.

        Article      
Read Time: 10 min
Employee burnout can impact work quality and morale. Discover the warning signs for burnout and how to prevent it in your workplace.

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Being an effective leader requires more than just technical knowledge. Create an environment where everyone can thrive and understand emotions in oneself and others.
HCM Software
HR + Payroll Software
Talent Management
Workforce Management
Employee Experience
Benefits Administration
Quick Links
Services + Support
855-565-3285
Talk to Sales
855-752-8564
© 2023 Paycor, Inc  |  Refer Paycor  |  Privacy Policy  |  1-800-501-9462 |
*Represents approximately 30,000 corporate clients covering 40,000 businesses employing people