Does Employee Morale Boost Revenue?

Happy employees produce greater ROI for companies. Learn more about the correlation and how you can boost employee morale.

Employee Experience
Last Updated:  April 12, 2018 | Read Time: 8 min
According to Gallup’s 2017 State of the American Workplace, engaged employees are more present and productive; they are more attuned to the needs of customers; and they are more observant of processes, standards and systems. When taken together, the behaviors of highly engaged business units result in 21% greater profitability.
Gallup’s research also shows that companies with engaged workforces have higher earnings per share (EPS). In a recent study, they examined publicly traded companies with EPS data available from 2011-2015 and found that organizations that follow employee engagement best practices — the winners of the Gallup Great Workplace Award — outperformed their competitors over recent years. This finding is consistent with previous analyses of the relationship between engagement and EPS.
Specifically, when comparing EPS from 2011-2013 and 2014-2015, Gallup found that:
The numbers speak for themselves, don’t they?
Let’s dig into the “whys and hows” of engagement and its effects on company revenue. Companies that report high engagement among their employees typically experience:
When employees feel positive and enjoy their work environments, their production is normally higher. This engagement helps managers achieve departmental and organizational objectives. When employees are producing more, their potential of earning more and getting promoted increases. A motivated sales rep, for instance, might generate a higher volume of sales, leading to greater commissions and bonuses and opportunities in new territories, as well having a positive impact on company revenue.
Absent employees cost organizations thousands of dollars in missed production or lower revenue. A Workforce Institute white paper published by workforce solutions company, Circadian, shows that annual absenteeism costs run $3,600 for hourly and $2,650 for salaried workers.
The negative impact of employee turnover is troubling due to its effect on financial and on productivity outcomes. When employees leave, they take with them the institutional knowledge and skills that helped contribute to the goals and performance of the organization.
The Saratoga Institute suggests that the average internal cost of turnover ranges from a minimum of one year’s pay and benefits to a maximum of two years’ salary. Other research indicates that the direct expenses of turnover can vary from 46 percent of annual pay for frontline employees to 176 percent for IT professionals and 241 percent for middle managers, according to Washington-based Corporate Leadership Council. High turnover also means that significant recruitment, replacement and training costs will be incurred.

If your company is having a low-morale crisis, you have several options to right the ship. One success formula is to make sure you’ve got the right employees in the right jobs, and that you’ve gone above and beyond to keep them there. Although a great salary, benefits, and bonuses and perks are one way to help ensure your people stay happy, the quality of work/life issues is a vital element that has a definite and measurable impact on their morale and results in successful contributions.
The first step toward fixing the problem is to take time to assess how your employees feel about their current roles and what the company can do to ensure you are positioning the business as an employer of choice. Remember to recognize exceptional workers within the organization. Having employees who are valued, recognized and appreciated for their efforts will generally boost the overall morale of the organization. These employees may also provide critical business and employee referrals to further contribute to the company’s success.
Management immediately can do a great deal to help increase employee morale. Consider the following ten tips:
Resolve to make employee morale a priority. A business can prosper with the right mind-set, tools, and the greatest asset – its employees. When employees feel respected, appreciated and recognized, the increased success of business will generally follow.
For more resources and best practices on building a culture of engagement, explore our HR Center of Excellence Employee Experice hub.
 Previous:
Next:
Stay up to date with the latest HR trends

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Employee satisfaction surveys are a great way to stay in tune with what your employees are thinking. Get real insights on how to engage and motivate your team.

        Article      
Read Time: 10 min
Employee burnout can impact work quality and morale. Discover the warning signs for burnout and how to prevent it in your workplace.

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Being an effective leader requires more than just technical knowledge. Create an environment where everyone can thrive and understand emotions in oneself and others.
HCM Software
HR + Payroll Software
Talent Management
Workforce Management
Employee Experience
Benefits Administration
Quick Links
Services + Support
855-565-3285
Talk to Sales
855-752-8564
© 2023 Paycor, Inc  |  Refer Paycor  |  Privacy Policy  |  1-800-501-9462 |
*Represents approximately 30,000 corporate clients covering 40,000 businesses employing people