COVID Visitor Policy Template

Social distancing in the workplace is needed for both employees and visitors. Customize this FREE COVID-19 Visitor Policy to meet your needs.

Promote a safe workplace for employees and guests.
Download Your 
                                   Free Copy 

DOWNLOADS:  431 And Counting...!
Access This Free Visitor Policy Template
January 13, 2022 Update: The Supreme Court ruled to block the proposed vaccine-or-test mandate for large employers (businesses with 100 employees or more). In a separate ruling, the court voted in favor of a vaccine mandate for workers employed at healthcare facilities that receive federal funding through Medicare and Medicaid. It’s estimated that this ruling could affect more than 17 million workers.
For healthcare organizations and employers that choose to establish vaccination and testing requirements, Paycor is here to support you with an immunization tracker, expert HR advice and a comprehensive suite of products to help keep your business compliant. Contact our team or learn more here.
Winter is flu season, and we all have to take a little bit more care about germs. This year, as we experience a winter surge of COVID-19, we have to be even more careful. To protect employees—and their families—business have to think carefully about who else can enter the workplace and what precautions visitors must take.
If you can have a remote-first workforce, great. But the reality for many industries is that for business to operate, employees need to be physically present in the workplace. To keep them safe, you should be promoting social distancing at work and staff should not be present if they are suffering from symptoms, have tested positive or have recently been in close contact with anyone who has tested positive.
A policy on the successful management of visitors will combine the same level of seriousness when it comes to social distancing with clear messaging so visitors know exactly what they can and can’t do.
When it comes to the safety of your employees and your community, businesses can’t afford to make mistakes. To help SMBs, Paycor is offering a free, downloadable COVID Visitor Policy template.Javascript is required to interact with this content.
NEXT:
NEXT: