Families First Coronavirus Response Act: Tips to Manage Employee Leave Scenarios

Eligible businesses are now able to take advantage of new tax credits to offset the costs associated with the Families First Coronavirus Response Act. See details here.

Workforce Management
Last Updated:  September 2, 2020 | Read Time: 5 min
UPDATE September 2: The scenarios in this article are affected by the Department of Labor’s latest guidance on FFCRA leave and remote learning. For scenarios below referencing school closures, the same rules apply for caring for children whose schools are operating remotely—but parents may only take leave for this purpose if schools offer no in-person alternative.
On March 18 the Families First Coronavirus Response Act was enacted to help individuals, families and businesses. The legislation requires employers with under 500 employees to give sick leave and paid family medical leave to eligible employees.
Eligible businesses are now able to take advantage of new tax credits to offset the costs associated with paid emergency leave and sick leave benefits implemented under the bill, including credit for health plan expenses affiliated with the new leaves.
Below is a list of scenarios your employees may experience during this time.
A full time employee is sick and believes they might have COVID-19. The employee is visiting a doctor to seek a medical diagnosis and will be absent from work duties.
An employee’s spouse is ordered into quarantine and needs immediate care.
An employee who has been employed for more than 30 days has a child and the child’s school has been cancelled because of COVID-19.
An employee who’s been employed for more than 30 day’s entire household is ordered into quarantine because of suspected COVID-19. The employee’s children are in daycare and the daycare has also closed.
An employee who’s been employed less than 30 days has a child and the child’s school is closed due to COVID-19.
Paycor’s Payroll solution now includes three new earnings codes and three new accrual codes to provide tax credits under the Coronavirus Response Act.
Paycor clients will need to add the new earning codes to affected employees and assign accrual codes to applicable employees.
If you are a Payor client, you can find directions on how to take these actions by visiting the knowledge base in Perform.
 Previous:
Next:
Stay up to date with the latest HR trends

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Employee satisfaction surveys are a great way to stay in tune with what your employees are thinking. Get real insights on how to engage and motivate your team.

        Article      
Read Time: 10 min
Employee burnout can impact work quality and morale. Discover the warning signs for burnout and how to prevent it in your workplace.

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Being an effective leader requires more than just technical knowledge. Create an environment where everyone can thrive and understand emotions in oneself and others.
HCM Software
HR + Payroll Software
Talent Management
Workforce Management
Employee Experience
Benefits Administration
Quick Links
Services + Support
855-565-3285
Talk to Sales
855-752-8564
© 2023 Paycor, Inc  |  Refer Paycor  |  Privacy Policy  |  1-800-501-9462 |
*Represents approximately 30,000 corporate clients covering 40,000 businesses employing people