PTO Payout Laws by State 2023

The payout of PTO varies from state to state. Find the comprehensive details on the PTO payout laws here.

Workforce Management
Last Updated: February 23, 2023 | Read Time: 32 min
Whether it’s a restaurant paying minimum wage or a multi-facility healthcare organization with salaried employees, most companies have formal paid time off (PTO) policies. Regardless of whether you call it a vacation day, sick time, furlough, PTO, PDO or something else, you need to know what laws govern PTO in the states where you operate. You should particularly be aware of any legal requirements regarding paying out banked PTO upon termination of employment.
Paying out your terminated employees’ accrued and unused vacation time isn’t subject to federal law, but it’s important to pay attention to states’ laws since regulation is under their purview. If your company has locations in multiple states, it’s important to review all statutes regarding separation pay. This handy table will provide the basic information you need to know but be sure to check each state’s departments of labor for specific guidelines. We’ll keep this chart updated with the latest state regulations on PTO payout in 2023 and beyond.
This is entirely dependent on state law and company policy. Companies that are working where there is a state law or who have an internal policy to pay PTO upon termination and do not can be heavily fined.
No, paid time off is not required by federal or state law; however, most businesses have a PTO policy to attract and retain good employees.
If you are still employed, your employer may allow you to carry over unused vacation time to the following year, but they do not have to pay you for unused time. Companies that are located in states with laws governing PTO payout or who have their own corporate guidelines in place to pay PTO upon termination must do so or face fines.
California, Colorado, Montana and Nebraska are the states that prohibit employers from implementing a use-it-or-lose-it policy.
This is entirely dependent on state law and company policy. If companies do not follow state law or their own published policy regarding PTO payouts they could be heavily fined.
Paycor Time makes labor management both time and cost effective. With our flexible mobile application, employees can request time off, see how much PTO they’ve accrued and easily access employer PTO policies. But that’s just the tip of the iceberg. Employees can also clock in and out, manage their schedules and view pay stubs, all while on the go. Want to learn more? 
Paycor is not a legal, tax, benefit, accounting or investment advisor. All communication from Paycor should be confirmed by your company’s legal, tax, benefit, accounting or investment advisor before making any decisions.
 Previous:
Next:
Stay up to date with the latest HR trends

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Employee satisfaction surveys are a great way to stay in tune with what your employees are thinking. Get real insights on how to engage and motivate your team.

        Article      
Read Time: 10 min
Employee burnout can impact work quality and morale. Discover the warning signs for burnout and how to prevent it in your workplace.

        Article      
Read Time: 9 min
Being an effective leader requires more than just technical knowledge. Create an environment where everyone can thrive and understand emotions in oneself and others.
HCM Software
HR + Payroll Software
Talent Management
Workforce Management
Employee Experience
Benefits Administration
Quick Links
Services + Support
855-565-3285
Talk to Sales
855-752-8564
© 2023 Paycor, Inc  |  Refer Paycor  |  Privacy Policy  |  1-800-501-9462 |
*Represents approximately 30,000 corporate clients covering 40,000 businesses employing people